Black hole - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia






Black hole

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

For other uses, see Black hole (disambiguation).




Simulation of gravitational lensing by a black hole, which distorts the image of a galaxy in the background




General relativity












Introduction
History



Mathematical formulation



Resources
Tests









Fundamental concepts


Equivalence principle
Special relativity
World line
Riemannian geometry








Phenomena





Kepler problem
Gravitational lensing
Gravitational waves
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Event horizon
Singularity
Black hole




Spacetime




Spacetime diagrams
Minkowski spacetime
Einstein–Rosen bridge














Equations
Formalisms






Equations




Linearized gravity
Einstein field equations
Friedmann
Geodesics
Mathisson–Papapetrou–Dixon
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein




Formalisms




ADM
BSSN
Post-Newtonian




Advanced theory




Kaluza–Klein theory
Quantum gravity











Solutions


Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Lemaître–Tolman
Taub-NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust








Scientists


Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedman
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Raychaudhuri
Taylor
Hulse
van Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
others









v
t
e





A black hole is a region of spacetime exhibiting such strong gravitational effects that nothing—including particles and electromagnetic radiation such as light—can escape from inside it.[1] The theory of general relativity predicts that a sufficiently compact mass can deform spacetime to form a black hole.[2][3] The boundary of the region from which no escape is possible is called the event horizon. Although crossing the event horizon has enormous effect on the fate of the object crossing it, it appears to have no locally detectable features. In many ways a black hole acts like an ideal black body, as it reflects no light.[4][5] Moreover, quantum field theory in curved spacetime predicts that event horizons emit Hawking radiation, with the same spectrum as a black body of a temperature inversely proportional to its mass. This temperature is on the order of billionths of a kelvin for black holes of stellar mass, making it essentially impossible to observe.
Objects whose gravitational fields are too strong for light to escape were first considered in the 18th century by John Michell and Pierre-Simon Laplace. The first modern solution of general relativity that would characterize a black hole was found by Karl Schwarzschild in 1916, although its interpretation as a region of space from which nothing can escape was first published by David Finkelstein in 1958. Black holes were long considered a mathematical curiosity; it was during the 1960s that theoretical work showed they were a generic prediction of general relativity. The discovery of neutron stars sparked interest in gravitationally collapsed compact objects as a possible astrophysical reality.
Black holes of stellar mass are expected to form when very massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycle. After a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing mass from its surroundings. By absorbing other stars and merging with other black holes, supermassive black holes of millions of solar masses (M☉) may form. There is general consensus that supermassive black holes exist in the centers of most galaxies.
Despite its invisible interior, the presence of a black hole can be inferred through its interaction with other matter and with electromagnetic radiation such as visible light. Matter that falls onto a black hole can form an external accretion disk heated by friction, forming some of the brightest objects in the universe. If there are other stars orbiting a black hole, their orbits can be used to determine the black hole's mass and location. Such observations can be used to exclude possible alternatives such as neutron stars. In this way, astronomers have identified numerous stellar black hole candidates in binary systems, and established that the radio source known as Sagittarius A*, at the core of our own Milky Way galaxy, contains a supermassive black hole of about 4.3 million solar masses.
On 11 February 2016, the LIGO collaboration announced the first observation of gravitational waves; because these waves were generated from a black hole merger it was the first ever direct detection of a binary black hole merger.[6]




Predicted appearance of non-rotating black hole with toroidal ring of ionised matter, such as has been proposed[7] as a model for Sagittarius A*. The asymmetry is due to the Doppler effect resulting from the enormous orbital speed needed for centrifugal balance of the very strong gravitational attraction of the hole.





Contents


1 History

1.1 General relativity
1.2 Golden age


2 Properties and structure

2.1 Physical properties
2.2 Event horizon
2.3 Singularity
2.4 Photon sphere
2.5 Ergosphere
2.6 Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)


3 Formation and evolution

3.1 Gravitational collapse

3.1.1 Primordial black holes in the Big Bang


3.2 High-energy collisions
3.3 Growth
3.4 Evaporation


4 Observational evidence

4.1 Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes
4.2 Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*
4.3 Accretion of matter
4.4 X-ray binaries

4.4.1 Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow
4.4.2 Quasi-periodic oscillations


4.5 Galactic nuclei
4.6 Microlensing (proposed)
4.7 Alternatives


5 Open questions

5.1 Entropy and thermodynamics
5.2 Information loss paradox


6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



History




Simulated view of a black hole in front of the Large Magellanic Cloud. Note the gravitational lensing effect, which produces two enlarged but highly distorted views of the Cloud. Across the top, the Milky Way disk appears distorted into an arc.


The idea of a body so massive that even light could not escape was first put forward by John Michell in a letter written in 1783 to Henry Cavendish of the Royal Society:

If the semi-diameter of a sphere of the same density as the Sun were to exceed that of the Sun in the proportion of 500 to 1, a body falling from an infinite height towards it would have acquired at its surface greater velocity than that of light, and consequently supposing light to be attracted by the same force in proportion to its vis inertiae, with other bodies, all light emitted from such a body would be made to return towards it by its own proper gravity.
— John Michell[8]

In 1796, mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace promoted the same idea in the first and second editions of his book Exposition du système du Monde (it was removed from later editions).[9][10] Such "dark stars" were largely ignored in the nineteenth century, since it was not understood how a massless wave such as light could be influenced by gravity.[11]
General relativity
In 1915, Albert Einstein developed his theory of general relativity, having earlier shown that gravity does influence light's motion. Only a few months later, Karl Schwarzschild found a solution to the Einstein field equations, which describes the gravitational field of a point mass and a spherical mass.[12] A few months after Schwarzschild, Johannes Droste, a student of Hendrik Lorentz, independently gave the same solution for the point mass and wrote more extensively about its properties.[13][14] This solution had a peculiar behaviour at what is now called the Schwarzschild radius, where it became singular, meaning that some of the terms in the Einstein equations became infinite. The nature of this surface was not quite understood at the time. In 1924, Arthur Eddington showed that the singularity disappeared after a change of coordinates (see Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates), although it took until 1933 for Georges Lemaître to realize that this meant the singularity at the Schwarzschild radius was an unphysical coordinate singularity.[15] Arthur Eddington did however comment on the possibility of a star with mass compressed to the Schwarzschild radius in a 1926 book, noting that Einstein's theory allows us to rule out overly large densities for visible stars like Betelgeuse because "a star of 250 million km radius could not possibly have so high a density as the sun. Firstly, the force of gravitation would be so great that light would be unable to escape from it, the rays falling back to the star like a stone to the earth. Secondly, the red shift of the spectral lines would be so great that the spectrum would be shifted out of existence. Thirdly, the mass would produce so much curvature of the space-time metric that space would close up around the star, leaving us outside (i.e., nowhere)."[16][17]
In 1931, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar calculated, using special relativity, that a non-rotating body of electron-degenerate matter above a certain limiting mass (now called the Chandrasekhar limit at 1.4 M☉) has no stable solutions.[18] His arguments were opposed by many of his contemporaries like Eddington and Lev Landau, who argued that some yet unknown mechanism would stop the collapse.[19] They were partly correct: a white dwarf slightly more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit will collapse into a neutron star,[20] which is itself stable because of the Pauli exclusion principle. But in 1939, Robert Oppenheimer and others predicted that neutron stars above approximately 3 M☉ (the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit) would collapse into black holes for the reasons presented by Chandrasekhar, and concluded that no law of physics was likely to intervene and stop at least some stars from collapsing to black holes.[21]
Oppenheimer and his co-authors interpreted the singularity at the boundary of the Schwarzschild radius as indicating that this was the boundary of a bubble in which time stopped. This is a valid point of view for external observers, but not for infalling observers. Because of this property, the collapsed stars were called "frozen stars",[22] because an outside observer would see the surface of the star frozen in time at the instant where its collapse takes it inside the Schwarzschild radius.
Golden age
See also: History of general relativity
In 1958, David Finkelstein identified the Schwarzschild surface as an event horizon, "a perfect unidirectional membrane: causal influences can cross it in only one direction".[23] This did not strictly contradict Oppenheimer's results, but extended them to include the point of view of infalling observers. Finkelstein's solution extended the Schwarzschild solution for the future of observers falling into a black hole. A complete extension had already been found by Martin Kruskal, who was urged to publish it.[24]
These results came at the beginning of the golden age of general relativity, which was marked by general relativity and black holes becoming mainstream subjects of research. This process was helped by the discovery of pulsars in 1967,[25][26] which, by 1969, were shown to be rapidly rotating neutron stars.[27] Until that time, neutron stars, like black holes, were regarded as just theoretical curiosities; but the discovery of pulsars showed their physical relevance and spurred a further interest in all types of compact objects that might be formed by gravitational collapse.
In this period more general black hole solutions were found. In 1963, Roy Kerr found the exact solution for a rotating black hole. Two years later, Ezra Newman found the axisymmetric solution for a black hole that is both rotating and electrically charged.[28] Through the work of Werner Israel,[29] Brandon Carter,[30][31] and David Robinson[32] the no-hair theorem emerged, stating that a stationary black hole solution is completely described by the three parameters of the Kerr–Newman metric: mass, angular momentum, and electric charge.[33]
At first, it was suspected that the strange features of the black hole solutions were pathological artifacts from the symmetry conditions imposed, and that the singularities would not appear in generic situations. This view was held in particular by Vladimir Belinsky, Isaak Khalatnikov, and Evgeny Lifshitz, who tried to prove that no singularities appear in generic solutions. However, in the late 1960s Roger Penrose[34] and Stephen Hawking used global techniques to prove that singularities appear generically.[35]
Work by James Bardeen, Jacob Bekenstein, Carter, and Hawking in the early 1970s led to the formulation of black hole thermodynamics.[36] These laws describe the behaviour of a black hole in close analogy to the laws of thermodynamics by relating mass to energy, area to entropy, and surface gravity to temperature. The analogy was completed when Hawking, in 1974, showed that quantum field theory predicts that black holes should radiate like a black body with a temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole.[37]
The first use of the term "black hole" in print was by journalist Ann Ewing in her article "'Black Holes' in Space", dated 18 January 1964, which was a report on a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.[38] John Wheeler used the term "black hole" at a lecture in 1967, leading some to credit him with coining the phrase. After Wheeler's use of the term, it was quickly adopted in general use.
Properties and structure
The no-hair theorem states that, once it achieves a stable condition after formation, a black hole has only three independent physical properties: mass, charge, and angular momentum.[33] Any two black holes that share the same values for these properties, or parameters, are indistinguishable according to classical (i.e. non-quantum) mechanics.
These properties are special because they are visible from outside a black hole. For example, a charged black hole repels other like charges just like any other charged object. Similarly, the total mass inside a sphere containing a black hole can be found by using the gravitational analog of Gauss's law, the ADM mass, far away from the black hole.[clarification needed][39] Likewise, the angular momentum can be measured from far away using frame dragging by the gravitomagnetic field.[clarification needed]
When an object falls into a black hole, any information about the shape of the object or distribution of charge on it is evenly distributed along the horizon of the black hole, and is lost to outside observers. The behavior of the horizon in this situation is a dissipative system that is closely analogous to that of a conductive stretchy membrane with friction and electrical resistance—the membrane paradigm.[40] This is different from other field theories such as electromagnetism, which do not have any friction or resistivity at the microscopic level, because they are time-reversible. Because a black hole eventually achieves a stable state with only three parameters, there is no way to avoid losing information about the initial conditions: the gravitational and electric fields of a black hole give very little information about what went in. The information that is lost includes every quantity that cannot be measured far away from the black hole horizon, including approximately conserved quantum numbers such as the total baryon number and lepton number. This behavior is so puzzling that it has been called the black hole information loss paradox.[41][42]
Physical properties




A simple illustration of a non-spinning black hole


The simplest static black holes have mass but neither electric charge nor angular momentum. These black holes are often referred to as Schwarzschild black holes after Karl Schwarzschild who discovered this solution in 1916.[12] According to Birkhoff's theorem, it is the only vacuum solution that is spherically symmetric.[43] This means that there is no observable difference between the gravitational field of such a black hole and that of any other spherical object of the same mass. The popular notion of a black hole "sucking in everything" in its surroundings is therefore only correct near a black hole's horizon; far away, the external gravitational field is identical to that of any other body of the same mass.[44]
Solutions describing more general black holes also exist. Non-rotating charged black holes are described by the Reissner–Nordström metric, while the Kerr metric describes a non-charged rotating black hole. The most general stationary black hole solution known is the Kerr–Newman metric, which describes a black hole with both charge and angular momentum.[45]
While the mass of a black hole can take any positive value, the charge and angular momentum are constrained by the mass. In Planck units, the total electric charge Q and the total angular momentum J are expected to satisfy



for a black hole of mass M. Black holes satisfying this inequality are called extremal. Solutions of Einstein's equations that violate this inequality exist, but they do not possess an event horizon. These solutions have so-called naked singularities that can be observed from the outside, and hence are deemed unphysical. The cosmic censorship hypothesis rules out the formation of such singularities, when they are created through the gravitational collapse of realistic matter.[2] This is supported by numerical simulations.[46]
Due to the relatively large strength of the electromagnetic force, black holes forming from the collapse of stars are expected to retain the nearly neutral charge of the star. Rotation, however, is expected to be a common feature of compact objects. The black-hole candidate binary X-ray source GRS 1915+105[47] appears to have an angular momentum near the maximum allowed value.

Black hole classifications

Class
Mass
Size


Supermassive black hole
~105–1010 MSun
~0.001–400 AU


Intermediate-mass black hole
~103 MSun
~103 km ≈ REarth


Stellar black hole
~10 MSun
~30 km


Micro black hole
up to ~MMoon
up to ~0.1 mm


Black holes are commonly classified according to their mass, independent of angular momentum J or electric charge Q. The size of a black hole, as determined by the radius of the event horizon, or Schwarzschild radius, is roughly proportional to the mass M through



where rsh is the Schwarzschild radius and MSun is the mass of the Sun.[48] This relation is exact only for black holes with zero charge and angular momentum; for more general black holes it can differ up to a factor of 2.
Event horizon
Main article: Event horizon



Far away from the black hole, a particle can move in any direction, as illustrated by the set of arrows. It is only restricted by the speed of light.



Closer to the black hole, spacetime starts to deform. There are more paths going towards the black hole than paths moving away.[Note 1]



Inside of the event horizon, all paths bring the particle closer to the center of the black hole. It is no longer possible for the particle to escape.


The defining feature of a black hole is the appearance of an event horizon—a boundary in spacetime through which matter and light can only pass inward towards the mass of the black hole. Nothing, not even light, can escape from inside the event horizon. The event horizon is referred to as such because if an event occurs within the boundary, information from that event cannot reach an outside observer, making it impossible to determine if such an event occurred.[50]
As predicted by general relativity, the presence of a mass deforms spacetime in such a way that the paths taken by particles bend towards the mass.[51] At the event horizon of a black hole, this deformation becomes so strong that there are no paths that lead away from the black hole.
To a distant observer, clocks near a black hole appear to tick more slowly than those further away from the black hole.[52] Due to this effect, known as gravitational time dilation, an object falling into a black hole appears to slow as it approaches the event horizon, taking an infinite time to reach it.[53] At the same time, all processes on this object slow down, from the view point of a fixed outside observer, causing any light emitted by the object to appear redder and dimmer, an effect known as gravitational redshift.[54] Eventually, the falling object becomes so dim that it can no longer be seen.
On the other hand, indestructible observers falling into a black hole do not notice any of these effects as they cross the event horizon. According to their own clocks, which appear to them to tick normally, they cross the event horizon after a finite time without noting any singular behaviour; it is impossible to determine the location of the event horizon from local observations.[55]
The shape of the event horizon of a black hole is always approximately spherical.[Note 2][58] For non-rotating (static) black holes the geometry of the event horizon is precisely spherical, while for rotating black holes the sphere is oblate.
Singularity
Main article: Gravitational singularity
At the center of a black hole, as described by general relativity, lies a gravitational singularity, a region where the spacetime curvature becomes infinite.[59] For a non-rotating black hole, this region takes the shape of a single point and for a rotating black hole, it is smeared out to form a ring singularity that lies in the plane of rotation.[60] In both cases, the singular region has zero volume. It can also be shown that the singular region contains all the mass of the black hole solution.[61] The singular region can thus be thought of as having infinite density.
Observers falling into a Schwarzschild black hole (i.e., non-rotating and not charged) cannot avoid being carried into the singularity, once they cross the event horizon. They can prolong the experience by accelerating away to slow their descent, but only up to a limit; after attaining a certain ideal velocity, it is best to free fall the rest of the way.[62] When they reach the singularity, they are crushed to infinite density and their mass is added to the total of the black hole. Before that happens, they will have been torn apart by the growing tidal forces in a process sometimes referred to as spaghettification or the "noodle effect".[63]
In the case of a charged (Reissner–Nordström) or rotating (Kerr) black hole, it is possible to avoid the singularity. Extending these solutions as far as possible reveals the hypothetical possibility of exiting the black hole into a different spacetime with the black hole acting as a wormhole.[64] The possibility of traveling to another universe is however only theoretical, since any perturbation would destroy this possibility.[65] It also appears to be possible to follow closed timelike curves (returning to one's own past) around the Kerr singularity, which lead to problems with causality like the grandfather paradox.[66] It is expected that none of these peculiar effects would survive in a proper quantum treatment of rotating and charged black holes.[67]
The appearance of singularities in general relativity is commonly perceived as signaling the breakdown of the theory.[68] This breakdown, however, is expected; it occurs in a situation where quantum effects should describe these actions, due to the extremely high density and therefore particle interactions. To date, it has not been possible to combine quantum and gravitational effects into a single theory, although there exist attempts to formulate such a theory of quantum gravity. It is generally expected that such a theory will not feature any singularities.[69][70]
Photon sphere
Main article: Photon sphere
The photon sphere is a spherical boundary of zero thickness in which photons that move on tangents to that sphere would be trapped in a circular orbit about the black hole. For non-rotating black holes, the photon sphere has a radius 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius. Their orbits would be dynamically unstable, hence any small perturbation, such as a particle of infalling matter, would cause an instability that would grow over time, either setting the photon on an outward trajectory causing it to escape the black hole, or on an inward spiral where it would eventually cross the event horizon.[71]
While light can still escape from the photon sphere, any light that crosses the photon sphere on an inbound trajectory will be captured by the black hole. Hence any light that reaches an outside observer from the photon sphere must have been emitted by objects between the photon sphere and the event horizon.[71]
Other compact objects, such as neutron stars, can also have photon spheres.[72] This follows from the fact that the gravitational field external to a spherically-symmetric object is governed by the Schwarzschild metric, which depends only on the object's mass rather than the radius of the object, hence any object whose radius shrinks to smaller than 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius will have a photon sphere.
Ergosphere
Main article: Ergosphere




The ergosphere is an oblate spheroid region outside of the event horizon, where objects cannot remain stationary.


Rotating black holes are surrounded by a region of spacetime in which it is impossible to stand still, called the ergosphere. This is the result of a process known as frame-dragging; general relativity predicts that any rotating mass will tend to slightly "drag" along the spacetime immediately surrounding it. Any object near the rotating mass will tend to start moving in the direction of rotation. For a rotating black hole, this effect is so strong near the event horizon that an object would have to move faster than the speed of light in the opposite direction to just stand still.[73]
The ergosphere of a black hole is a volume whose inner boundary is the black hole's event horizon and an outer boundary of an oblate spheroid, which coincides with the event horizon at the poles but noticeably wider around the equator. The outer boundary is sometimes called the ergosurface.
Objects and radiation can escape normally from the ergosphere. Through the Penrose process, objects can emerge from the ergosphere with more energy than they entered. This energy is taken from the rotational energy of the black hole causing the latter to slow.[74]
Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)
Main article: Innermost stable circular orbit
In Newtonian gravity, test particles can stably orbit at arbitrary distances from a central object. In general relativity, however, there exists an innermost stable circular orbit (often called the ISCO), inside of which, any infinitesimal perturbations to a circular orbit will lead to inspiral into the black hole.[75] The location of the ISCO depends on the spin of the black hole, in the case of a Schwarzschild black hole (spin zero) is:



and decreases with increasing spin.
Formation and evolution
Considering the exotic nature of black holes, it may be natural[clarification needed] to question if such bizarre objects could exist in nature or to suggest that they are merely pathological solutions to Einstein's equations. Einstein himself wrongly thought that black holes would not form, because he held that the angular momentum of collapsing particles would stabilize their motion at some radius.[76] This led the general relativity community to dismiss all results to the contrary for many years. However, a minority of relativists continued to contend that black holes were physical objects,[77] and by the end of the 1960s, they had persuaded the majority of researchers in the field that there is no obstacle to the formation of an event horizon.
Once an event horizon forms, Penrose proved, a singularity will form within.[34] Shortly afterwards, Hawking showed that many cosmological solutions that describe the Big Bang have singularities without scalar fields or other exotic matter (see "Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems").[clarification needed] The Kerr solution, the no-hair theorem, and the laws of black hole thermodynamics showed that the physical properties of black holes were simple and comprehensible, making them respectable subjects for research.[78] The primary formation process for black holes is expected to be the gravitational collapse of heavy objects such as stars, but there are also more exotic processes that can lead to the production of black holes.
Gravitational collapse
Main article: Gravitational collapse
Gravitational collapse occurs when an object's internal pressure is insufficient to resist the object's own gravity. For stars this usually occurs either because a star has too little "fuel" left to maintain its temperature through stellar nucleosynthesis, or because a star that would have been stable receives extra matter in a way that does not raise its core temperature. In either case the star's temperature is no longer high enough to prevent it from collapsing under its own weight.[79] The collapse may be stopped by the degeneracy pressure of the star's constituents, allowing the condensation of matter into an exotic denser state. The result is one of the various types of compact star. The type of compact star formed depends on the mass of the remnant of the original star left after the outer layers have been blown away. Such explosions, from a supernova explosion or by pulsations, leads to planetary nebula. Note that this mass can be substantially less than the original star. Remnants exceeding 5 M☉ are produced by stars that were over 20 M☉ before the collapse.[79]
If the mass of the remnant exceeds about 3–4 M☉ (the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit[21]), either because the original star was very heavy or because the remnant collected additional mass through accretion of matter, even the degeneracy pressure of neutrons is insufficient to stop the collapse. No known mechanism (except possibly quark degeneracy pressure, see quark star) is powerful enough to stop the implosion and the object will inevitably collapse to form a black hole.[79]
The gravitational collapse of heavy stars is assumed to be responsible for the formation of stellar mass black holes. Star formation in the early universe may have resulted in very massive stars, which upon their collapse would have produced black holes of up to 103 M☉. These black holes could be the seeds of the supermassive black holes found in the centers of most galaxies.[80]
While most of the energy released during gravitational collapse is emitted very quickly, an outside observer does not actually see the end of this process. Even though the collapse takes a finite amount of time from the reference frame of infalling matter, a distant observer would see the infalling material slow and halt just above the event horizon, due to gravitational time dilation. Light from the collapsing material takes longer and longer to reach the observer, with the light emitted just before the event horizon forms delayed an infinite amount of time. Thus the external observer never sees the formation of the event horizon; instead, the collapsing material seems to become dimmer and increasingly red-shifted, eventually fading away.[81]
Primordial black holes in the Big Bang
Gravitational collapse requires great density. In the current epoch of the universe these high densities are only found in stars, but in the early universe shortly after the big bang densities were much greater, possibly allowing for the creation of black holes. The high density alone is not enough to allow the formation of black holes since a uniform mass distribution will not allow the mass to bunch up. In order for primordial black holes to form in such a dense medium, there must be initial density perturbations that can then grow under their own gravity. Different models for the early universe vary widely in their predictions of the size of these perturbations. Various models predict the creation of black holes, ranging from a Planck mass to hundreds of thousands of solar masses.[82] Primordial black holes could thus account for the creation of any type of black hole.[clarification needed]
High-energy collisions




A simulated event in the CMS detector, a collision in which a micro black hole may be created.


Gravitational collapse is not the only process that could create black holes. In principle, black holes could be formed in high-energy collisions that achieve sufficient density. As of 2002, no such events have been detected, either directly or indirectly as a deficiency of the mass balance in particle accelerator experiments.[83] This suggests that there must be a lower limit for the mass of black holes. Theoretically, this boundary is expected to lie around the Planck mass (mP = √ħc/G ≈ 7019120000000000000♠1.2×1019 GeV/c2 ≈ 6992220000000000000♠2.2×10−8 kg), where quantum effects are expected to invalidate the predictions of general relativity.[84] This would put the creation of black holes firmly out of reach of any high-energy process occurring on or near the Earth. However, certain developments in quantum gravity suggest that the Planck mass could be much lower: some braneworld scenarios for example put the boundary as low as 7000100000000000000♠1 TeV/c2.[85] This would make it conceivable for micro black holes to be created in the high-energy collisions that occur when cosmic rays hit the Earth's atmosphere, or possibly in the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. These theories are very speculative, and the creation of black holes in these processes is deemed unlikely by many specialists.[86] Even if micro black holes could be formed, it is expected that they would evaporate in about 10−25 seconds, posing no threat to the Earth.[87]
Growth
Once a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing additional matter. Any black hole will continually absorb gas and interstellar dust from its surroundings and omnipresent cosmic background radiation. This is the primary process through which supermassive black holes seem to have grown.[80] A similar process has been suggested for the formation of intermediate-mass black holes found in globular clusters.[88]
Another possibility for black hole growth, is for a black hole to merge with other objects such as stars or even other black holes. Although not necessary for growth, this is thought to have been important, especially for the early development of supermassive black holes, which could have formed from the coagulation of many smaller objects.[80] The process has also been proposed as the origin of some intermediate-mass black holes.[89][90]
Evaporation
Main article: Hawking radiation
In 1974, Hawking predicted that black holes are not entirely black but emit small amounts of thermal radiation;[37] this effect has become known as Hawking radiation. By applying quantum field theory to a static black hole background, he determined that a black hole should emit particles that display a perfect black body spectrum. Since Hawking's publication, many others have verified the result through various approaches.[91] If Hawking's theory of black hole radiation is correct, then black holes are expected to shrink and evaporate over time as they lose mass by the emission of photons and other particles.[37] The temperature of this thermal spectrum (Hawking temperature) is proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, which, for a Schwarzschild black hole, is inversely proportional to the mass. Hence, large black holes emit less radiation than small black holes.[92]
A stellar black hole of 1 M☉ has a Hawking temperature of about 100 nanokelvins. This is far less than the 2.7 K temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation. Stellar-mass or larger black holes receive more mass from the cosmic microwave background than they emit through Hawking radiation and thus will grow instead of shrink.[citation needed] To have a Hawking temperature larger than 2.7 K (and be able to evaporate), a black hole would need a mass less than the Moon. Such a black hole would have a diameter of less than a tenth of a millimeter.[93]
If a black hole is very small, the radiation effects are expected to become very strong. Even a black hole that is heavy compared to a human would evaporate in an instant. A black hole with the mass of a car would have a diameter of about 10−24 m and take a nanosecond to evaporate, during which time it would briefly have a luminosity of more than 200 times that of the Sun. Lower-mass black holes are expected to evaporate even faster; for example, a black hole of mass 1 TeV/c2 would take less than 10−88 seconds to evaporate completely. For such a small black hole, quantum gravitation effects are expected to play an important role and could hypothetically make such a small black hole stable, although current developments in quantum gravity do not indicate so.[94][95]
The Hawking radiation for an astrophysical black hole is predicted to be very weak and would thus be exceedingly difficult to detect from Earth. A possible exception, however, is the burst of gamma rays emitted in the last stage of the evaporation of primordial black holes. Searches for such flashes have proven unsuccessful and provide stringent limits on the possibility of existence of low mass primordial black holes.[96] NASA's Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope launched in 2008 will continue the search for these flashes.[97]
Observational evidence




Gas cloud ripped apart by black hole at the centre of the Milky Way.[98]


By their very nature, black holes do not directly emit any electromagnetic radiation other than the hypothetical Hawking radiation, so astrophysicists searching for black holes must generally rely on indirect observations. For example, a black hole's existence can sometimes be inferred by observing its gravitational interactions with its surroundings. However, the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT), run by MIT's Haystack Observatory, is an attempt to directly observe the immediate environment of the event horizon of Sagittarius A*, the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way. The first image of the event horizon may appear as early as 2016.[99] The existence of magnetic fields just outside the event horizon of Sagittarius A*, which were predicted by theoretical studies of black holes, was confirmed by the EHT in 2015.[100][101]
Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes
On 24 September 2015 the LIGO gravitational wave observatory made the first-ever successful observation of gravitational waves.[6][102] The signal was consistent with theoretical predictions for the gravitational waves produced by the merger of two black holes: one with about 36 solar masses, and the other around 29 solar masses.[6][103] This observation provides the most concrete evidence for the existence of black holes to date. For instance, the gravitational wave signal suggests that the separation of the two object prior to merger was just 350 km (or roughly 4 times the Schwarzschild radius corresponding to the inferred masses). The objects must therefore have been extremely compact, leaving black holes as the most plausible interpretation.[6]
More importantly, the signal observed by LIGO also included the start of the post-merger ringdown, the signal produced as the newly formed compact object settles down to a stationary state. Arguably, the ringdown is the most direct way of observing a black hole.[104] From the LIGO signal it is possible to extract the frequency and damping time of the dominant mode of the ringdown. From these it is possible to infer the mass and angular momentum of the final object, which match independent predictions from numerical simulations of the merger.[105] The frequency and decay time of the dominant mode are determined by the geometry of the photon sphere. Hence, observation of this mode confirms the presence of a photon sphere, however it cannot exclude possible exotic alternatives to black holes that are compact enough to have a photon sphere.[104]
The observation also provides the first observational evidence for the existence of stellar-mass black hole binaries. Furthermore, it is the first observational evidence of stellar-mass black holes weighing 25 solar masses or more.[106]
Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*
The proper motions of stars near the center of our own Milky Way provide strong observational evidence that these stars are orbiting a supermassive black hole.[107] Since 1995, astronomers have tracked the motions of 90 stars orbiting an invisible object coincident with the radio source Sagittarius A*. By fitting their motions to Keplerian orbits, the astronomers were able to infer, in 1998, that a 2.6 million M☉ object must be contained in a volume with a radius of 0.02 light-years to cause the motions of those stars.[108] Since then, one of the stars—called S2—has completed a full orbit. From the orbital data, astronomers were able to make refine the calculations of the mass to 4.3 million M☉ and a radius of less than 0.002 lightyears for the object causing the orbital motion of those stars.[107] The upper limit on the object's size is still too large to test whether it is smaller than its Schwarzschild radius; nevertheless, these observations strongly suggest that the central object is a supermassive black hole as there are no other plausible scenarios for confining so much invisible mass into such a small volume.[108] Additionally, there is some observational evidence that this object might possess an event horizon, a feature unique to black holes.[109]
Accretion of matter
See also: Accretion disc




Black hole with corona, X-ray source (artist's concept).[110]


Due to conservation of angular momentum, gas falling into the gravitational well created by a massive object will typically form a disc-like structure around the object. Artists' impressions such as the accompanying representation of a black hole with corona commonly depict the black hole as if it were a flat-space material body hiding the part of the disc just behind it, but detailed mathematical modelling[111] shows that the image of the disc would actually be distorted by the bending of light that originated behind the black hole in such a way that the upper side of the disc would be entirely visible, while there would be a partially visible secondary image of the underside of the disk.




Predicted view from outside the horizon of a Schwarzschild black hole lit by a thin accretion disc


Within such a disc, friction would cause angular momentum to be transported outward, allowing matter to fall further inward, thus releasing potential energy and increasing the temperature of the gas.[112]




Blurring of X-rays near Black hole (NuSTAR; 12 August 2014).[110]


When the accreting object is a neutron star or a black hole, the gas in the inner accretion disc orbits at very high speeds because of its proximity to the compact object. The resulting friction is so significant that it heats the inner disc to temperatures at which it emits vast amounts of electromagnetic radiation (mainly X-rays). These bright X-ray sources may be detected by telescopes. This process of accretion is one of the most efficient energy-producing processes known; up to 40% of the rest mass of the accreted material can be emitted as radiation.[112] (In nuclear fusion only about 0.7% of the rest mass will be emitted as energy.) In many cases, accretion discs are accompanied by relativistic jets that are emitted along the poles, which carry away much of the energy. The mechanism for the creation of these jets is currently not well understood.
As such, many of the universe's more energetic phenomena have been attributed to the accretion of matter on black holes. In particular, active galactic nuclei and quasars are believed to be the accretion discs of supermassive black holes.[113] Similarly, X-ray binaries are generally accepted to be binary star systems in which one of the two stars is a compact object accreting matter from its companion.[113] It has also been suggested that some ultraluminous X-ray sources may be the accretion disks of intermediate-mass black holes.[114]
In November 2011 the first direct observation of a quasar accretion disk around a supermassive black hole was reported.[115][116]
X-ray binaries
See also: X-ray binary


Play media


A computer simulation of a star being consumed by a black hole. The blue dot indicates the location of the black hole.






A Chandra X-Ray Observatory image of Cygnus X-1, which was the first strong black hole candidate discovered


X-ray binaries are binary star systems that emit a majority of their radiation in the X-ray part of the spectrum. These X-ray emissions are generally thought to result when one of the stars (compact object) accretes matter from another (regular) star. The presence of an ordinary star in such a system provides a unique opportunity for studying the central object and to determine if it might be a black hole.


Play media


This animation compares the X-ray 'heartbeats' of GRS 1915 and IGR J17091, two black holes that ingest gas from companion stars.


If such a system emits signals that can be directly traced back to the compact object, it cannot be a black hole. The absence of such a signal does, however, not exclude the possibility that the compact object is a neutron star. By studying the companion star it is often possible to obtain the orbital parameters of the system and to obtain an estimate for the mass of the compact object. If this is much larger than the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit (that is, the maximum mass a neutron star can have before it collapses) then the object cannot be a neutron star and is generally expected to be a black hole.[113]
The first strong candidate for a black hole, Cygnus X-1, was discovered in this way by Charles Thomas Bolton,[117] Louise Webster and Paul Murdin[118] in 1972.[119][120] Some doubt, however, remained due to the uncertainties that result from the companion star being much heavier than the candidate black hole.[113] Currently, better candidates for black holes are found in a class of X-ray binaries called soft X-ray transients.[113] In this class of system, the companion star is of relatively low mass allowing for more accurate estimates of the black hole mass. Moreover, these systems are actively emit X-rays for only several months once every 10–50 years. During the period of low X-ray emission (called quiescence), the accretion disc is extremely faint allowing detailed observation of the companion star during this period. One of the best such candidates is V404 Cyg.
Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow
The faintness of the accretion disc of an X-ray binary during quiescence is suspected to be caused by the flow of mass entering a mode called an advection-dominated accretion flow (ADAF). In this mode, almost all the energy generated by friction in the disc is swept along with the flow instead of radiated away. If this model is correct, then it forms strong qualitative evidence for the presence of an event horizon,[121] since if the object at the center of the disc had a solid surface, it would emit large amounts of radiation as the highly energetic gas hits the surface,[clarification needed] an effect that is observed for neutron stars in a similar state.[112]
Quasi-periodic oscillations
Main article: Quasi-periodic oscillations
The X-ray emissions from accretion disks sometimes flicker at certain frequencies. These signals are called quasi-periodic oscillations and are thought to be caused by material moving along the inner edge of the accretion disk (the innermost stable circular orbit). As such their frequency is linked to the mass of the compact object. They can thus be used as an alternative way to determine the mass of candidate black holes.[122]
Galactic nuclei
See also: Active galactic nucleus




Magnetic waves, called Alfvén S-waves, flow from the base of black hole jets.



Astronomers use the term "active galaxy" to describe galaxies with unusual characteristics, such as unusual spectral line emission and very strong radio emission. Theoretical and observational studies have shown that the activity in these active galactic nuclei (AGN) may be explained by the presence of supermassive black holes, which can be millions of times more massive than stellar ones. The models of these AGN consist of a central black hole that may be millions or billions of times more massive than the Sun; a disk of gas and dust called an accretion disk; and two jets perpendicular to the accretion disk.[123][124]




Detection of unusually bright X-Ray flare from Sagittarius A*, a black hole in the center of the Milky Way galaxy on 5 January 2015.[125]


Although supermassive black holes are expected to be found in most AGN, only some galaxies' nuclei have been more carefully studied in attempts to both identify and measure the actual masses of the central supermassive black hole candidates. Some of the most notable galaxies with supermassive black hole candidates include the Andromeda Galaxy, M32, M87, NGC 3115, NGC 3377, NGC 4258, NGC 4889, NGC 1277, OJ 287, APM 08279+5255 and the Sombrero Galaxy.[126]
It is now widely accepted that the center of nearly every galaxy, not just active ones, contains a supermassive black hole.[127] The close observational correlation between the mass of this hole and the velocity dispersion of the host galaxy's bulge, known as the M-sigma relation, strongly suggests a connection between the formation of the black hole and the galaxy itself.[128]




Simulation of gas cloud after close approach to the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way.[129]


Microlensing (proposed)
Another way that the black hole nature of an object may be tested in the future is through observation of effects caused by a strong gravitational field in their vicinity. One such effect is gravitational lensing: The deformation of spacetime around a massive object causes light rays to be deflected much as light passing through an optic lens. Observations have been made of weak gravitational lensing, in which light rays are deflected by only a few arcseconds. However, it has never been directly observed for a black hole.[130] One possibility for observing gravitational lensing by a black hole would be to observe stars in orbit around the black hole. There are several candidates for such an observation in orbit around Sagittarius A*.[130]
Alternatives
See also: Exotic star
The evidence for stellar black holes strongly relies on the existence of an upper limit for the mass of a neutron star. The size of this limit heavily depends on the assumptions made about the properties of dense matter. New exotic phases of matter could push up this bound.[113] A phase of free quarks at high density might allow the existence of dense quark stars,[131] and some supersymmetric models predict the existence of Q stars.[132] Some extensions of the standard model posit the existence of preons as fundamental building blocks of quarks and leptons, which could hypothetically form preon stars.[133] These hypothetical models could potentially explain a number of observations of stellar black hole candidates. However, it can be shown from arguments in general relativity that any such object will have a maximum mass.[113]
Since the average density of a black hole inside its Schwarzschild radius is inversely proportional to the square of its mass, supermassive black holes are much less dense than stellar black holes (the average density of a 108 M☉ black hole is comparable to that of water).[113] Consequently, the physics of matter forming a supermassive black hole is much better understood and the possible alternative explanations for supermassive black hole observations are much more mundane. For example, a supermassive black hole could be modelled by a large cluster of very dark objects. However, such alternatives are typically not stable enough to explain the supermassive black hole candidates.[113]
The evidence for the existence of stellar and supermassive black holes implies that in order for black holes to not form, general relativity must fail as a theory of gravity, perhaps due to the onset of quantum mechanical corrections. A much anticipated feature of a theory of quantum gravity is that it will not feature singularities or event horizons and thus black holes would not be real artifacts.[134] In 2002,[135] much attention has been drawn by the fuzzball model in string theory. Based on calculations for specific situations in string theory, the proposal suggests that generically the individual states of a black hole solution do not have an event horizon or singularity, but that for a classical/semi-classical observer the statistical average of such states appears just as an ordinary black hole as deduced from general relativity.[136]
Open questions
Entropy and thermodynamics
Further information: Black hole thermodynamics




The formula for the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy (S) of a black hole, which depends on the area of the black hole (A). The constants are the speed of light (c), the Boltzmann constant (k), Newton's constant (G), and the reduced Planck constant (ħ).


In 1971, Hawking showed under general conditions[Note 3] that the total area of the event horizons of any collection of classical black holes can never decrease, even if they collide and merge.[137] This result, now known as the second law of black hole mechanics, is remarkably similar to the second law of thermodynamics, which states that the total entropy of a system can never decrease. As with classical objects at absolute zero temperature, it was assumed that black holes had zero entropy. If this were the case, the second law of thermodynamics would be violated by entropy-laden matter entering a black hole, resulting in a decrease of the total entropy of the universe. Therefore, Bekenstein proposed that a black hole should have an entropy, and that it should be proportional to its horizon area.[138]
The link with the laws of thermodynamics was further strengthened by Hawking's discovery that quantum field theory predicts that a black hole radiates blackbody radiation at a constant temperature. This seemingly causes a violation of the second law of black hole mechanics, since the radiation will carry away energy from the black hole causing it to shrink. The radiation, however also carries away entropy, and it can be proven under general assumptions that the sum of the entropy of the matter surrounding a black hole and one quarter of the area of the horizon as measured in Planck units is in fact always increasing. This allows the formulation of the first law of black hole mechanics as an analogue of the first law of thermodynamics, with the mass acting as energy, the surface gravity as temperature and the area as entropy.[138]
One puzzling feature is that the entropy of a black hole scales with its area rather than with its volume, since entropy is normally an extensive quantity that scales linearly with the volume of the system. This odd property led Gerard 't Hooft and Leonard Susskind to propose the holographic principle, which suggests that anything that happens in a volume of spacetime can be described by data on the boundary of that volume.[139]
Although general relativity can be used to perform a semi-classical calculation of black hole entropy, this situation is theoretically unsatisfying. In statistical mechanics, entropy is understood as counting the number of microscopic configurations of a system that have the same macroscopic qualities (such as mass, charge, pressure, etc.). Without a satisfactory theory of quantum gravity, one cannot perform such a computation for black holes. Some progress has been made in various approaches to quantum gravity. In 1995, Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa showed that counting the microstates of a specific supersymmetric black hole in string theory reproduced the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy.[140] Since then, similar results have been reported for different black holes both in string theory and in other approaches to quantum gravity like loop quantum gravity.[141]
Information loss paradox
Main article: Black hole information paradox



Unsolved problem in physics:
Is physical information lost in black holes?
(more unsolved problems in physics)



Because a black hole has only a few internal parameters, most of the information about the matter that went into forming the black hole is lost. Regardless of the type of matter which goes into a black hole, it appears that only information concerning the total mass, charge, and angular momentum are conserved. As long as black holes were thought to persist forever this information loss is not that problematic, as the information can be thought of as existing inside the black hole, inaccessible from the outside. However, black holes slowly evaporate by emitting Hawking radiation. This radiation does not appear to carry any additional information about the matter that formed the black hole, meaning that this information appears to be gone forever.[142]
The question whether information is truly lost in black holes (the black hole information paradox) has divided the theoretical physics community (see Thorne–Hawking–Preskill bet). In quantum mechanics, loss of information corresponds to the violation of vital property called unitarity, which has to do with the conservation of probability. It has been argued that loss of unitarity would also imply violation of conservation of energy.[143] Over recent years evidence has been building that indeed information and unitarity are preserved in a full quantum gravitational treatment of the problem.[144]
See also




Cosmology portal



Star portal



Astronomy portal





List of nearest black holes
Black brane
Black hole complementarity
Black hole starship
Black holes in fiction
Black string
BTZ black hole
Dumb hole
General relativity
Kugelblitz (astrophysics)
List of black holes
Susskind-Hawking battle
Timeline of black hole physics
White hole
Wormhole


Notes

^ The set of possible paths, or more accurately the future light cone containing all possible world lines (in this diagram the light cone is represented by the V-shaped region bounded by arrows representing light ray world lines), is tilted in this way in Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates (the diagram is a "cartoon" version of an Eddington–Finkelstein coordinate diagram), but in other coordinates the light cones are not tilted in this way, for example in Schwarzschild coordinates they simply narrow without tilting as one approaches the event horizon, and in Kruskal–Szekeres coordinates the light cones don't change shape or orientation at all.[49]
^ This is true only for 4-dimensional spacetimes. In higher dimensions more complicated horizon topologies like a black ring are possible.[56][57]
^ In particular, he assumed that all matter satisfies the weak energy condition.

References


^ Wald 1984, pp. 299–300
^ a b Wald, R. M. (1997). "Gravitational Collapse and Cosmic Censorship". arXiv:gr-qc/9710068 [gr-qc]. 
^ Overbye, Dennis (8 June 2015). "Black Hole Hunters". NASA. Retrieved 8 June 2015. 
^ Schutz, Bernard F. (2003). Gravity from the ground up. Cambridge University Press. p. 110. ISBN 0-521-45506-5. 
^ Davies, P. C. W. (1978). "Thermodynamics of Black Holes" (PDF). Reports on Progress in Physics 41 (8): 1313–1355. Bibcode:1978RPPh...41.1313D. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/41/8/004. 
^ a b c d Abbott, B.P.; et al. (2016). "Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger". Phys. Rev. Lett. 116: 061102. arXiv:1602.03837. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102. 
^ O. Straub, F.H. Vincent, M.A. Abramowicz, E. Gourgoulhon, T. Paumard, ``Modelling the black hole silhouette in Sgr A* with ion tori,Astron. Astroph 543 (2012) A8
^ Michell, J. (1784). "On the Means of Discovering the Distance, Magnitude, &c. of the Fixed Stars, in Consequence of the Diminution of the Velocity of Their Light, in Case Such a Diminution Should be Found to Take Place in any of Them, and Such Other Data Should be Procured from Observations, as Would be Farther Necessary for That Purpose". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 74 (0): 35–57. Bibcode:1784RSPT...74...35M. doi:10.1098/rstl.1784.0008. JSTOR 106576. 
^ Gillispie, C. C. (2000). Pierre-Simon Laplace, 1749–1827: a life in exact science. Princeton paperbacks. Princeton University Press. p. 175. ISBN 0-691-05027-9. 
^ Israel, W. (1989). "Dark stars: the evolution of an idea". In Hawking, S. W.; Israel, W. 300 Years of Gravitation. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-37976-2. 
^ Thorne 1994, pp. 123–124
^ a b Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Massenpunktes nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 7: 189–196.  and Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Kugel aus inkompressibler Flüssigkeit nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 18: 424–434. 
^ Droste, J. (1917). "On the field of a single centre in Einstein's theory of gravitation, and the motion of a particle in that field" (PDF). Proceedings Royal Academy Amsterdam 19 (1): 197–215. 
^ Kox, A. J. (1992). "General Relativity in the Netherlands: 1915–1920". In Eisenstaedt, J.; Kox, A. J. Studies in the history of general relativity. Birkhäuser. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-8176-3479-7. [dead link]
^ 't Hooft, G. (2009). "Introduction to the Theory of Black Holes" (PDF). Institute for Theoretical Physics / Spinoza Institute: 47–48. 
^ Eddington, Arthur (1926). The Internal Constitution of the Stars. Cambridge University Press. p. 6. 
^ Kip Thorne comments on this quote on pages 134-135 of his book Black Holes and Time Warps, writing that "The first conclusion was the Newtonian version of light not escaping; the second was a semi-accurate, relativistic description; and the third was typical Eddingtonian hyperbole ... when a star is as small as the critical circumference, the curvature is strong but not infinite, and space is definitely not wrapped around the star. Eddington may have known this, but his description made a good story, and it captured in a whimsical way the spirit of Schwarzschild's spacetime curvature."
^ Venkataraman, G. (1992). Chandrasekhar and his limit. Universities Press. p. 89. ISBN 81-7371-035-X. 
^ Detweiler, S. (1981). "Resource letter BH-1: Black holes". American Journal of Physics 49 (5): 394–400. Bibcode:1981AmJPh..49..394D. doi:10.1119/1.12686. 
^ Harpaz, A. (1994). Stellar evolution. A K Peters. p. 105. ISBN 1-56881-012-1. 
^ a b Oppenheimer, J. R.; Volkoff, G. M. (1939). "On Massive Neutron Cores". Physical Review 55 (4): 374–381. Bibcode:1939PhRv...55..374O. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.55.374. 
^ Ruffini, R.; Wheeler, J. A. (1971). "Introducing the black hole" (PDF). Physics Today 24 (1): 30–41. Bibcode:1971PhT....24a..30R. doi:10.1063/1.3022513. 
^ Finkelstein, D. (1958). "Past-Future Asymmetry of the Gravitational Field of a Point Particle". Physical Review 110 (4): 965–967. Bibcode:1958PhRv..110..965F. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.110.965. 
^ Kruskal, M. (1960). "Maximal Extension of Schwarzschild Metric". Physical Review 119 (5): 1743. Bibcode:1960PhRv..119.1743K. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.119.1743. 
^ Hewish, A.; et al. (1968). "Observation of a Rapidly Pulsating Radio Source". Nature 217 (5130): 709–713. Bibcode:1968Natur.217..709H. doi:10.1038/217709a0 
^ Pilkington, J. D. H.; et al. (1968). "Observations of some further Pulsed Radio Sources". Nature 218 (5137): 126–129. Bibcode:1968Natur.218..126P. doi:10.1038/218126a0 
^ Hewish, A. (1970). "Pulsars". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 8 (1): 265–296. Bibcode:1970ARA&A...8..265H. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.08.090170.001405. 
^ Newman, E. T.; et al. (1965). "Metric of a Rotating, Charged Mass". Journal of Mathematical Physics 6 (6): 918. Bibcode:1965JMP.....6..918N. doi:10.1063/1.1704351 
^ Israel, W. (1967). "Event Horizons in Static Vacuum Space-Times". Physical Review 164 (5): 1776. Bibcode:1967PhRv..164.1776I. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.164.1776. 
^ Carter, B. (1971). "Axisymmetric Black Hole Has Only Two Degrees of Freedom". Physical Review Letters 26 (6): 331. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26..331C. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.331. 
^ Carter, B. (1977). "The vacuum black hole uniqueness theorem and its conceivable generalisations". Proceedings of the 1st Marcel Grossmann meeting on general relativity. pp. 243–254. 
^ Robinson, D. (1975). "Uniqueness of the Kerr Black Hole". Physical Review Letters 34 (14): 905. Bibcode:1975PhRvL..34..905R. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.34.905. 
^ a b Heusler, M. (1998). "Stationary Black Holes: Uniqueness and Beyond". Living Reviews in Relativity 1 (6). doi:10.12942/lrr-1998-6. Archived from the original on 1999-02-03. Retrieved 2011-02-08. 
^ a b Penrose, R. (1965). "Gravitational Collapse and Space-Time Singularities". Physical Review Letters 14 (3): 57. Bibcode:1965PhRvL..14...57P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.14.57. 
^ Ford, L. H. (2003). "The Classical Singularity Theorems and Their Quantum Loopholes". International Journal of Theoretical Physics 42 (6): 1219. doi:10.1023/A:1025754515197. 
^ Bardeen, J. M.; Carter, B.; Hawking, S. W. (1973). "The four laws of black hole mechanics". Communications in Mathematical Physics 31 (2): 161–170. Bibcode:1973CMaPh..31..161B. doi:10.1007/BF01645742. MR MR0334798. Zbl 1125.83309. 
^ a b c Hawking, S. W. (1974). "Black hole explosions?". Nature 248 (5443): 30–31. Bibcode:1974Natur.248...30H. doi:10.1038/248030a0. 
^ Quinion, M. (26 April 2008). "Black Hole". World Wide Words. Retrieved 2008-06-17. 
^ Carroll 2004, p. 253
^ Thorne, K. S.; Price, R. H. (1986). Black holes: the membrane paradigm. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-03770-8. 
^ Anderson, Warren G. (1996). "The Black Hole Information Loss Problem". Usenet Physics FAQ. Retrieved 2009-03-24. 
^ Preskill, J. (1994-10-21). Black holes and information: A crisis in quantum physics (PDF). Caltech Theory Seminar. 
^ Hawking & Ellis 1973, Appendix B
^ Seeds, Michael A.; Backman, Dana E. (2007). Perspectives on Astronomy. Cengage Learning. p. 167. ISBN 0-495-11352-2 
^ Shapiro, S. L.; Teukolsky, S. A. (1983). Black holes, white dwarfs, and neutron stars: the physics of compact objects. John Wiley and Sons. p. 357. ISBN 0-471-87316-0. 
^ Berger, B. K. (2002). "Numerical Approaches to Spacetime Singularities". Living Reviews in Relativity 5: 1. arXiv:gr-qc/0201056. Bibcode:2002LRR.....5....1B. doi:10.12942/lrr-2002-1. Retrieved 2007-08-04. 
^ McClintock, J. E.; Shafee, R.; Narayan, R.; Remillard, R. A.; Davis, S. W.; Li, L.-X. (2006). "The Spin of the Near-Extreme Kerr Black Hole GRS 1915+105". Astrophysical Journal 652 (1): 518–539. arXiv:astro-ph/0606076. Bibcode:2006ApJ...652..518M. doi:10.1086/508457. 
^ Wald 1984, pp. 124–125
^ Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973, p. 848
^ Wheeler 2007, p. 179
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 5.4 and 7.3
^ Carroll 2004, p. 217
^ Carroll 2004, p. 218
^ "Inside a black hole". Knowing the universe and its secrets. Retrieved 2009-03-26. 
^ Carroll 2004, p. 222
^ Emparan, R.; Reall, H. S. (2008). "Black Holes in Higher Dimensions". Living Reviews in Relativity 11 (6). arXiv:0801.3471. Bibcode:2008LRR....11....6E. doi:10.12942/lrr-2008-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10. 
^ Obers, N. A. (2009). Papantonopoulos, Eleftherios, ed. "Black Holes in Higher-Dimensional Gravity". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 211–258. arXiv:0802.0519. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0. 
^ hawking & ellis 1973, Ch. 9.3
^ Carroll 2004, p. 205
^ Carroll 2004, pp. 264–265
^ Carroll 2004, p. 252
^ Lewis, G. F.; Kwan, J. (2007). "No Way Back: Maximizing Survival Time Below the Schwarzschild Event Horizon". Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 24 (2): 46–52. arXiv:0705.1029. Bibcode:2007PASA...24...46L. doi:10.1071/AS07012. 
^ Wheeler 2007, p. 182
^ Carroll 2004, pp. 257–259 and 265–266
^ Droz, S.; Israel, W.; Morsink, S. M. (1996). "Black holes: the inside story". Physics World 9 (1): 34–37. Bibcode:1996PhyW....9...34D. 
^ Carroll 2004, p. 266
^ Poisson, E.; Israel, W. (1990). "Internal structure of black holes". Physical Review D 41 (6): 1796. Bibcode:1990PhRvD..41.1796P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.41.1796. 
^ Wald 1984, p. 212
^ Hamade, R. (1996). "Black Holes and Quantum Gravity". Cambridge Relativity and Cosmology. University of Cambridge. Retrieved 2009-03-26. 
^ Palmer, D. "Ask an Astrophysicist: Quantum Gravity and Black Holes". NASA. Retrieved 2009-03-26. 
^ a b Nitta, Daisuke; Chiba, Takeshi; Sugiyama, Naoshi (September 2011). "Shadows of colliding black holes". Physical Review D 84 (6). arXiv:1106.2425. Bibcode:2011PhRvD..84f3008N. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.84.063008 
^ Nemiroff, R. J. (1993). "Visual distortions near a neutron star and black hole". American Journal of Physics 61 (7): 619. arXiv:astro-ph/9312003. Bibcode:1993AmJPh..61..619N. doi:10.1119/1.17224. 
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.6
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.7
^ Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973
^ Einstein, A. (1939). "On A Stationary System With Spherical Symmetry Consisting of Many Gravitating Masses". Annals of Mathematics 40 (4): 922–936. doi:10.2307/1968902. JSTOR 1968902. 
^ Kerr, R. P. (2009). "The Kerr and Kerr-Schild metrics". In Wiltshire, D. L.; Visser, M.; Scott, S. M. The Kerr Spacetime. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:0706.1109. ISBN 978-0-521-88512-6. 
^ Hawking, S. W.; Penrose, R. (January 1970). "The Singularities of Gravitational Collapse and Cosmology". Proceedings of the Royal Society A 314 (1519): 529–548. Bibcode:1970RSPSA.314..529H. doi:10.1098/rspa.1970.0021. JSTOR 2416467. 
^ a b c Carroll 2004, Section 5.8
^ a b c Rees, M. J.; Volonteri, M. (2007). "Massive black holes: formation and evolution". In Karas, V.; Matt, G. Black Holes from Stars to Galaxies—Across the Range of Masses. Cambridge University Press. pp. 51–58. arXiv:astro-ph/0701512. ISBN 978-0-521-86347-6. 
^ Penrose, R. (2002). "Gravitational Collapse: The Role of General Relativity" (PDF). General Relativity and Gravitation 34 (7): 1141. Bibcode:2002GReGr..34.1141P. doi:10.1023/A:1016578408204. 
^ Carr, B. J. (2005). "Primordial Black Holes: Do They Exist and Are They Useful?". In Suzuki, H.; Yokoyama, J.; Suto, Y.; Sato, K. Inflating Horizon of Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology. Universal Academy Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0511743. ISBN 4-946443-94-0. 
^ Giddings, S. B.; Thomas, S. (2002). "High energy colliders as black hole factories: The end of short distance physics". Physical Review D 65 (5): 056010. arXiv:hep-ph/0106219. Bibcode:2002PhRvD..65e6010G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.65.056010. 
^ Harada, T. (2006). "Is there a black hole minimum mass?". Physical Review D 74 (8): 084004. arXiv:gr-qc/0609055. Bibcode:2006PhRvD..74h4004H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.74.084004. 
^ Arkani–Hamed, N.; Dimopoulos, S.; Dvali, G. (1998). "The hierarchy problem and new dimensions at a millimeter". Physics Letters B 429 (3–4): 263. arXiv:hep-ph/9803315. Bibcode:1998PhLB..429..263A. doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(98)00466-3. 
^ LHC Safety Assessment Group. "Review of the Safety of LHC Collisions" (PDF). CERN. 
^ Cavaglià, M. (2010). "Particle accelerators as black hole factories?". Einstein-Online (Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute)) 4: 1010. 
^ Vesperini, E.; McMillan, S. L. W.; d'Ercole, A.; et al. (2010). "Intermediate-Mass Black Holes in Early Globular Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 713 (1): L41–L44. arXiv:1003.3470. Bibcode:2010ApJ...713L..41V. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/713/1/L41. 
^ Zwart, S. F. P.; Baumgardt, H.; Hut, P.; et al. (2004). "Formation of massive black holes through runaway collisions in dense young star clusters". Nature 428 (6984): 724–6. arXiv:astro-ph/0402622. Bibcode:2004Natur.428..724P. doi:10.1038/nature02448. PMID 15085124. 
^ O'Leary, R. M.; Rasio, F. A.; Fregeau, J. M.; et al. (2006). "Binary Mergers and Growth of Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal 637 (2): 937. arXiv:astro-ph/0508224. Bibcode:2006ApJ...637..937O. doi:10.1086/498446. 
^ Page, D. N. (2005). "Hawking radiation and black hole thermodynamics". New Journal of Physics 7: 203. arXiv:hep-th/0409024. Bibcode:2005NJPh....7..203P. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/7/1/203. 
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 9.6
^ "Evaporating black holes?". Einstein online. Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics. 2010. Retrieved 2010-12-12. 
^ Giddings, S. B.; Mangano, M. L. (2008). "Astrophysical implications of hypothetical stable TeV-scale black holes". Physical Review D 78 (3): 035009. arXiv:0806.3381. Bibcode:2008PhRvD..78c5009G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.78.035009. 
^ Peskin, M. E. (2008). "The end of the world at the Large Hadron Collider?". Physics 1: 14. Bibcode:2008PhyOJ...1...14P. doi:10.1103/Physics.1.14. 
^ Fichtel, C. E.; Bertsch, D. L.; Dingus, B. L.; et al. (1994). "Search of the energetic gamma-ray experiment telescope (EGRET) data for high-energy gamma-ray microsecond bursts". Astrophysical Journal 434 (2): 557–559. Bibcode:1994ApJ...434..557F. doi:10.1086/174758. 
^ Naeye, R. "Testing Fundamental Physics". NASA. Retrieved 2008-09-16. 
^ "Ripped Apart by a Black Hole". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 19 July 2013. 
^ O'Neill, Ian (2 July 2015). "Event Horizon Telescope Will Probe Spacetime's Mysteries". Discovery News. Retrieved 6 December 2015. 
^ Johnson, M. D.; Fish, V. L.; Doeleman, S. S.; Marrone, D. P.; Plambeck, R. L.; Wardle, J. F. C.; Akiyama, K.; Asada, K.; Beaudoin, C. (2015-12-04). "Resolved magnetic-field structure and variability near the event horizon of Sagittarius A*". Science 350 (6265): 1242–1245. arXiv:1512.01220. Bibcode:2015Sci...350.1242J. doi:10.1126/science.aac7087. ISSN 0036-8075. 
^ "Event Horizon Telescope Reveals Magnetic Fields at Milky Way's Central Black Hole". cfa.harvard.edu. 3 December 2015. Retrieved 12 January 2016. 
^ Overbye, Dennis (11 February 2016). "Physicists Detect Gravitational Waves, Proving Einstein Right". New York Times. Retrieved 11 February 2016. 
^ Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Properties of the binary black hole merger GW150914". arXiv:1602.03840. 
^ a b Cardoso, V., Franzin, E., and Pani, P. (2016). "Is the gravitational-wave ringdown a probe of the event horizon?". Physical Review Letters. arXiv:1602.07309. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Tests of general relativity with GW150914". LIGO. Retrieved 12 February 2016. 
^ "Astrophysical Implications of the Binary Black Hole Merger GW150914". Astrophys. J. Lett. 818 (2): L22. arXiv:1602.03846. Bibcode:2016ApJ...818L..22A. doi:10.3847/2041-8205/818/2/L22. 
^ a b Gillessen, S.; Eisenhauer, F.; Trippe, S.; et al. (2009). "Monitoring Stellar Orbits around the Massive Black Hole in the Galactic Center". The Astrophysical Journal 692 (2): 1075. arXiv:0810.4674. Bibcode:2009ApJ...692.1075G. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/692/2/1075. 
^ a b Ghez, A. M.; Klein, B. L.; Morris, M.; et al. (1998). "High Proper‐Motion Stars in the Vicinity of Sagittarius A*: Evidence for a Supermassive Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy". The Astrophysical Journal 509 (2): 678. arXiv:astro-ph/9807210. Bibcode:1998ApJ...509..678G. doi:10.1086/306528. 
^ Broderick, Avery; Loeb, Abraham; Narayan, Ramesh (August 2009). "The Event Horizon of Sagittarius A*". The Astrophysical Journal 701: 1357. arXiv:0903.1105. Bibcode:2009ApJ...701.1357B. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/701/2/1357. 
^ a b "NASA's NuSTAR Sees Rare Blurring of Black Hole Light". NASA. 12 August 2014. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Short-cut method of solution of geodesic equations for Schwarzchild black hole", J.A. Marck, Class.Quant. Grav. 13 (1996) 393-402.
^ a b c McClintock, J. E.; Remillard, R. A. (2006). "Black Hole Binaries". In Lewin, W.; van der Klis, M. Compact Stellar X-ray Sources. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0306213. ISBN 0-521-82659-4.  section 4.1.5.
^ a b c d e f g h i Celotti, A.; Miller, J. C.; Sciama, D. W. (1999). "Astrophysical evidence for the existence of black holes". Classical and Quantum Gravity 16 (12A): A3–A21. arXiv:astro-ph/9912186. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/16/12A/301. 
^ Winter, L. M.; Mushotzky, R. F.; Reynolds, C. S. (2006). "XMM‐Newton Archival Study of the Ultraluminous X‐Ray Population in Nearby Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal 649 (2): 730. arXiv:astro-ph/0512480. Bibcode:2006ApJ...649..730W. doi:10.1086/506579. 
^ information@eso.org. "Hubble directly observes the disc around a black hole". www.spacetelescope.org. Retrieved 2016-03-07. 
^ Muñoz, José A.; Mediavilla, Evencio; Kochanek, Christopher S.; Falco, Emilio; Mosquera, Ana María (2011-12-01). "A Study of Gravitational Lens Chromaticity with the Hubble Space Telescope". The Astrophysical Journal 742 (2): 67. arXiv:1107.5932. Bibcode:2011ApJ...742...67M. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/742/2/67. ISSN 0004-637X. 
^ Bolton, C. T. (1972). "Identification of Cygnus X-1 with HDE 226868". Nature 235 (5336): 271–273. Bibcode:1972Natur.235..271B. doi:10.1038/235271b0. 
^ Webster, B. L.; Murdin, P. (1972). "Cygnus X-1—a Spectroscopic Binary with a Heavy Companion ?". Nature 235 (5332): 37–38. Bibcode:1972Natur.235...37W. doi:10.1038/235037a0. 
^ Rolston, B. (10 November 1997). "The First Black Hole". The bulletin. University of Toronto. Archived from the original on 2008-05-02. Retrieved 2008-03-11. 
^ Shipman, H. L.; Yu, Z; Du, Y.W (1 January 1975). "The implausible history of triple star models for Cygnus X-1 Evidence for a black hole". Astrophysical Letters 16 (1): 9–12. Bibcode:1975ApL....16....9S. doi:10.1016/S0304-8853(99)00384-4. 
^ Narayan, R.; McClintock, J. (2008). "Advection-dominated accretion and the black hole event horizon". New Astronomy Reviews 51 (10–12): 733. arXiv:0803.0322. Bibcode:2008NewAR..51..733N. doi:10.1016/j.newar.2008.03.002. 
^ "NASA scientists identify smallest known black hole" (Press release). Goddard Space Flight Center. 2008-04-01. Retrieved 2009-03-14. 
^ Krolik, J. H. (1999). Active Galactic Nuclei. Princeton University Press. Ch. 1.2. ISBN 0-691-01151-6. 
^ Sparke, L. S.; Gallagher, J. S. (2000). Galaxies in the Universe: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press. Ch. 9.1. ISBN 0-521-59740-4. 
^ Chou, Felicia; Anderson, Janet; Watzke, Megan (5 January 2015). "RELEASE 15-001 - NASA’s Chandra Detects Record-Breaking Outburst from Milky Way’s Black Hole". NASA. Retrieved 6 January 2015. 
^ Kormendy, J.; Richstone, D. (1995). "Inward Bound—The Search For Supermassive Black Holes In Galactic Nuclei". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 33 (1): 581–624. Bibcode:1995ARA&A..33..581K. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.33.090195.003053. 
^ King, A. (2003). "Black Holes, Galaxy Formation, and the MBH-σ Relation". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 596 (1): 27–29. arXiv:astro-ph/0308342. Bibcode:2003ApJ...596L..27K. doi:10.1086/379143. 
^ Ferrarese, L.; Merritt, D. (2000). "A Fundamental Relation Between Supermassive Black Holes and their Host Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 539 (1): 9–12. arXiv:astro-ph/0006053. Bibcode:2000ApJ...539L...9F. doi:10.1086/312838. 
^ "A Black Hole's Dinner is Fast Approaching". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 6 February 2012. 
^ a b Bozza, V. (2010). "Gravitational Lensing by Black Holes". General Relativity and Gravitation 42 (42): 2269–2300. arXiv:0911.2187. Bibcode:2010GReGr..42.2269B. doi:10.1007/s10714-010-0988-2. 
^ Kovacs, Z.; Cheng, K. S.; Harko, T. (2009). "Can stellar mass black holes be quark stars?". Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 400 (3): 1632–1642. arXiv:0908.2672. Bibcode:2009MNRAS.400.1632K. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15571.x. 
^ Kusenko, A. (2006). "Properties and signatures of supersymmetric Q-balls". arXiv:hep-ph/0612159. 
^ Hansson, J.; Sandin, F. (2005). "Preon stars: a new class of cosmic compact objects". Physics Letters B 616 (1–2): 1. arXiv:astro-ph/0410417. Bibcode:2005PhLB..616....1H. doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2005.04.034. 
^ Kiefer, C. (2006). "Quantum gravity: general introduction and recent developments". Annalen der Physik 15 (1–2): 129. arXiv:gr-qc/0508120. Bibcode:2006AnP...518..129K. doi:10.1002/andp.200510175. 
^ "[NKS, Mathur states, 't Hooft-Polyakov monopoles, and Ward-Takahashi identities] - A New Kind of Science: The NKS Forum". wolframscience.com. Retrieved 12 April 2015. 
^ Skenderis, K.; Taylor, M. (2008). "The fuzzball proposal for black holes". Physics Reports 467 (4–5): 117. arXiv:0804.0552. Bibcode:2008PhR...467..117S. doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2008.08.001. 
^ Hawking, S. W. (1971). "Gravitational Radiation from Colliding Black Holes". Physical Review Letters 26 (21): 1344–1346. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26.1344H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.1344. 
^ a b Wald, R. M. (2001). "The Thermodynamics of Black Holes". Living Reviews in Relativity 4: 6. arXiv:gr-qc/9912119. Bibcode:2001LRR.....4....6W. doi:10.12942/lrr-2001-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10. 
^ 't Hooft, G. (2001). "The Holographic Principle". In Zichichi, A. Basics and highlights in fundamental physics. Subnuclear series 37. World Scientific. arXiv:hep-th/0003004. ISBN 978-981-02-4536-8. 
^ Strominger, A.; Vafa, C. (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379 (1–4): 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0. 
^ Carlip, S. (2009). "Black Hole Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 89. arXiv:0807.4520. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6_3. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0. 
^ Hawking, S. W. "Does God Play Dice?". www.hawking.org.uk. Retrieved 2009-03-14. 
^ Giddings, S. B. (1995). "The black hole information paradox". Particles, Strings and Cosmology. Johns Hopkins Workshop on Current Problems in Particle Theory 19 and the PASCOS Interdisciplinary Symposium 5. arXiv:hep-th/9508151. 
^ Mathur, S. D. (2011). The information paradox: conflicts and resolutions. XXV International Symposium on Lepton Photon Interactions at High Energies. arXiv:1201.2079. 


Further reading

Popular reading


Ferguson, Kitty (1991). Black Holes in Space-Time. Watts Franklin. ISBN 0-531-12524-6. 
Hawking, Stephen (1988). A Brief History of Time. Bantam Books, Inc. ISBN 0-553-38016-8. 
Hawking, Stephen; Penrose, Roger (1996). The Nature of Space and Time. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-03791-4. 
Melia, Fulvio (2003). The Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy. Princeton U Press. ISBN 978-0-691-09505-9. 
Melia, Fulvio (2003). The Edge of Infinity. Supermassive Black Holes in the Universe. Cambridge U Press. ISBN 978-0-521-81405-8. 
Pickover, Clifford (1998). Black Holes: A Traveler's Guide. Wiley, John & Sons, Inc. ISBN 0-471-19704-1. 
Thorne, Kip S. (1994). Black Holes and Time Warps. Norton, W. W. & Company, Inc. ISBN 0-393-31276-3. 
Wheeler, J. Craig (2007). Cosmic Catastrophes (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-85714-7. 


University textbooks and monographs


Carroll, Sean M. (2004). Spacetime and Geometry. Addison Wesley. ISBN 0-8053-8732-3. , the lecture notes on which the book was based are available for free from Sean Carroll's website.
Carter, B. (1973). "Black hole equilibrium states". In DeWitt, B. S.; DeWitt, C. Black Holes. 
Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan (1999). Mathematical Theory of Black Holes. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-850370-9. 
Frolov, V. P.; Novikov, I. D. (1998). "Black hole physics". 
Frolov, Valeri P.; Zelnikov, Andrei (2011). Introduction to Black Hole Physics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-969229-3. Zbl 1234.83001. 
Hawking, S. W.; Ellis, G. F. R. (1973). Large Scale Structure of space time. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-09906-4. 
Melia, Fulvio (2007). The Galactic Supermassive Black Hole. Princeton U Press. ISBN 978-0-691-13129-0. 
Misner, Charles; Thorne, Kip S.; Wheeler, John (1973). Gravitation. W. H. Freeman and Company. ISBN 0-7167-0344-0. 
Taylor, Edwin F.; Wheeler, John Archibald (2000). Exploring Black Holes. Addison Wesley Longman. ISBN 0-201-38423-X. 
Wald, Robert M. (1984). General Relativity. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-87033-5. 
Wald, Robert M. (1992). Space, Time, and Gravity: The Theory of the Big Bang and Black Holes. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-87029-4. 
Black holes Teviet Creighton, Richard H. Price Scholarpedia 3(1):4277. doi:10.4249/scholarpedia.4277


Review papers


Gallo, Elena; Marolf, Donald (2009). "Resource Letter BH-2: Black Holes". American Journal of Physics 77 (4): 294. arXiv:0806.2316. Bibcode:2009AmJPh..77..294G. doi:10.1119/1.3056569. 
Hughes, Scott A. (2005). "Trust but verify: The case for astrophysical black holes". arXiv:hep-ph/0511217.  Lecture notes from 2005 SLAC Summer Institute.

External links



Find more about
Black hole
at Wikipedia's sister projects




Media from Commons



News stories from Wikinews



Quotations from Wikiquote



Source texts from Wikisource



Textbooks from Wikibooks



Learning resources from Wikiversity




Black Holes on In Our Time at the BBC. (listen now)
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Singularities and Black Holes" by Erik Curiel and Peter Bokulich.
Black Holes: Gravity's Relentless Pull—Interactive multimedia Web site about the physics and astronomy of black holes from the Space Telescope Science Institute
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on Black Holes
"Schwarzschild Geometry"
Advanced Mathematics of Black Hole Evaporation
Hubble site


Videos


16-year-long study tracks stars orbiting Milky Way black hole
Movie of Black Hole Candidate from Max Planck Institute
Nature.com 2015-04-20 3D simulations of colliding black holes
Computer visualisation of the signal detected by LIGO
Two Black Holes Merge into One (based upon the signal GW150914









v
t
e


Black holes






Types



Schwarzschild
Rotating
Charged
Virtual
Binary











Size



Micro
Extremal

Electron


Stellar
Intermediate-mass
Supermassive
Quasar

Active galactic nucleus
Blazar
Large quasar group










Formation



Stellar evolution
Gravitational collapse
Neutron star

Related links


Compact star

Quark
Exotic


Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit
White dwarf

Related links


Supernova

Related links


Hypernova
Gamma-ray burst








Properties



Thermodynamics
Schwarzschild radius
M–sigma relation
Event horizon
Quasi-periodic oscillation
Photon sphere
Ergosphere
Hawking radiation
Penrose process
Blandford–Znajek process
Bondi accretion
Spaghettification
Gravitational lens








Models



Gravitational singularity

Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems


Primordial black hole
Gravastar
Dark star
Dark-energy star
Black star
Eternally collapsing object

Magnetospheric eternally collapsing object


Fuzzball
White hole
Naked singularity
Ring singularity
Immirzi parameter
Membrane paradigm
Kugelblitz
Wormhole
Quasi-star








Issues



No-hair theorem
Information paradox
Cosmic censorship
Alternative models
Holographic principle
Black hole complementarity
firewall (physics)
ER=EPR








Metrics



Schwarzschild
Kerr
Reissner–Nordström
Kerr–Newman








Lists



Black holes
Most massive
Quasars








Related



Timeline of black hole physics
Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer
Hypercompact stellar system
Black hole starship
















v
t
e


Relativity






Special
relativity





Background




Principle of relativity
Introduction to special relativity
Special relativity









Foundations




Frame of reference
Speed of light
Rapidity
Maxwell's equations









Formulation




Galilean relativity
Galilean transformation
Lorentz transformation









Consequences




Time dilation
Relativistic mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Length contraction
Relativity of simultaneity
Relativistic Doppler effect
Thomas precession
Relativistic disks









Spacetime




Light cone
World line
Spacetime diagram
Biquaternions
Minkowski space














General
relativity





Background




Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Resources









Fundamental
concepts




Special relativity
Equivalence principle
World line
Riemannian geometry
Minkowski diagram









Phenomena




Black hole
Event horizon
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Lenses
Singularity
Waves
Ladder paradox
Twin paradox
Two-body problem









Equations




ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
Einstein field equations
Geodesic equation
Friedmann equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation









Advanced
theories




Brans–Dicke theory
Kaluza–Klein
Mach's principle
Quantum gravity









Solutions




Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Taub–NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust











Scientists



Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedmann
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Taylor
Hulse
Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
Weiss
Bondi
Misner
others
















v
t
e


String theory






Background



Strings
History of string theory

First superstring revolution
Second superstring revolution


String theory landscape











Theory



Nambu–Goto action
Polyakov action
Bosonic string theory
Superstring theory

Type I string
Type II string

Type IIA string theory
Type IIB string theory


Heterotic string


N=2 superstring
F-theory
String field theory
Matrix string theory
Nonlinear sigma model
Tachyon condensation
RNS formalism








Concepts





String duality




T-duality
S-duality
U-duality
Montonen–Olive duality
Mysterious duality









Particles and fields




Graviton
Dilaton
Tachyon
Ramond–Ramond field
Kalb–Ramond field
Magnetic monopole









Branes




D-brane
S-brane
Black brane
Black holes
Black string
Brane cosmology
Quiver diagram
Hanany–Witten transition











Conformal
field theory



Virasoro algebra
Mirror symmetry
Conformal anomaly
Conformal algebra
Superconformal algebra
Vertex operator algebra
Loop algebra
Kac–Moody algebra
Wess–Zumino–Witten model








Gauge theory



Anomalies
Instantons
Chern–Simons form
Bogomol'nyi–Prasad–Sommerfield bound
Exceptional Lie groups (G2, F4, E6, E7, E8)
ADE classification
Dirac string
P-form electrodynamics








Geometry



Kaluza–Klein theory
Compactification
Why 10 dimensions?
Kähler manifold
Ricci-flat manifold

Calabi–Yau manifold
Hyperkähler manifold

K3 surface


G2 manifold
Spin(7) manifold


Generalized complex manifold
Orbifold
Conifold
Orientifold
Moduli space
Hořava–Witten domain wall
K-theory (physics)
Twisted K-theory








Supersymmetry



Supergravity
Superspace
Lie superalgebra
Lie supergroup








Holography



Holographic principle
AdS/CFT correspondence








M-theory



Matrix theory
Introduction to M-theory








String theorists



Nima Arkani-Hamed
Michael Francis Atiyah
Tom Banks
David Berenstein
Gerald Cleaver
Robbert Dijkgraaf
Jacques Distler
Michael Douglas
Michael Duff
Sergio Ferrara
Willy Fischler
Daniel Friedan
Rajesh Gopakumar
Michael Green
Brian Greene
David Gross
Steven Gubser
Sergei Gukov
Jeffrey Harvey
Petr Hořava
Gary Gibbons
Michio Kaku
Renata Kallosh
Theodor Kaluza
Anton Kapustin
Igor Klebanov
Oskar Klein
Hong Liu
Juan Maldacena
Donald Marolf
Emil Martinecm
Shiraz Minwalla
Gregory Moore
Lubos Motl
Sunil Mukhi
Robert Myers
Asad Naqvi
K. S. Narain
Horatiu Nastase
Nikita Nekrasov
André Neveu
Dimitri Nanopoulos
Holger Bech Nielsen
Peter van Nieuwenhuizen
Hirosi Ooguri
Joseph Polchinski
Alexander Polyakov
Arvind Rajaraman
Lisa Randall
Seifallah Randjbar-Daemi
Martin Rocek
John H. Schwarz
Nathan Seiberg
Ashoke Sen
Steve Shenker
Warren Siegel
Eva Silverstein
Matthias Staudacher
Andrew Strominger
Leonard Susskind
Paul Townsend
Sandip Trivedi
Cumrun Vafa
Gabriele Veneziano
Erik Verlinde
Herman Verlinde
Edward Witten
Tamiaki Yoneya
Alexander Zamolodchikov
Alexei Zamolodchikov
Barton Zwiebach













Authority control



GND: 4053793-6
BNF: cb11933630s (data)
NDL: 00561056











 
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Black_hole&oldid=716792743"					
Categories: Unsolved problems in physicsBlack holesGalaxiesTheory of relativityHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from February 2013Articles with inconsistent citation formatsCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2016Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2015Good articlesUse dmy dates from March 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersArticles containing video clips 




Black hole
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

For other uses, see Black hole (disambiguation).




Simulation of gravitational lensing by a black hole, which distorts the image of a galaxy in the background




General relativity












Introduction
History



Mathematical formulation



Resources
Tests









Fundamental concepts


Equivalence principle
Special relativity
World line
Riemannian geometry








Phenomena





Kepler problem
Gravitational lensing
Gravitational waves
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Event horizon
Singularity
Black hole




Spacetime




Spacetime diagrams
Minkowski spacetime
Einstein–Rosen bridge














Equations
Formalisms






Equations




Linearized gravity
Einstein field equations
Friedmann
Geodesics
Mathisson–Papapetrou–Dixon
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein




Formalisms




ADM
BSSN
Post-Newtonian




Advanced theory




Kaluza–Klein theory
Quantum gravity











Solutions


Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Lemaître–Tolman
Taub-NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust








Scientists


Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedman
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Raychaudhuri
Taylor
Hulse
van Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
others









v
t
e





A black hole is a region of spacetime exhibiting such strong gravitational effects that nothing—including particles and electromagnetic radiation such as light—can escape from inside it.[1] The theory of general relativity predicts that a sufficiently compact mass can deform spacetime to form a black hole.[2][3] The boundary of the region from which no escape is possible is called the event horizon. Although crossing the event horizon has enormous effect on the fate of the object crossing it, it appears to have no locally detectable features. In many ways a black hole acts like an ideal black body, as it reflects no light.[4][5] Moreover, quantum field theory in curved spacetime predicts that event horizons emit Hawking radiation, with the same spectrum as a black body of a temperature inversely proportional to its mass. This temperature is on the order of billionths of a kelvin for black holes of stellar mass, making it essentially impossible to observe.
Objects whose gravitational fields are too strong for light to escape were first considered in the 18th century by John Michell and Pierre-Simon Laplace. The first modern solution of general relativity that would characterize a black hole was found by Karl Schwarzschild in 1916, although its interpretation as a region of space from which nothing can escape was first published by David Finkelstein in 1958. Black holes were long considered a mathematical curiosity; it was during the 1960s that theoretical work showed they were a generic prediction of general relativity. The discovery of neutron stars sparked interest in gravitationally collapsed compact objects as a possible astrophysical reality.
Black holes of stellar mass are expected to form when very massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycle. After a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing mass from its surroundings. By absorbing other stars and merging with other black holes, supermassive black holes of millions of solar masses (M☉) may form. There is general consensus that supermassive black holes exist in the centers of most galaxies.
Despite its invisible interior, the presence of a black hole can be inferred through its interaction with other matter and with electromagnetic radiation such as visible light. Matter that falls onto a black hole can form an external accretion disk heated by friction, forming some of the brightest objects in the universe. If there are other stars orbiting a black hole, their orbits can be used to determine the black hole's mass and location. Such observations can be used to exclude possible alternatives such as neutron stars. In this way, astronomers have identified numerous stellar black hole candidates in binary systems, and established that the radio source known as Sagittarius A*, at the core of our own Milky Way galaxy, contains a supermassive black hole of about 4.3 million solar masses.
On 11 February 2016, the LIGO collaboration announced the first observation of gravitational waves; because these waves were generated from a black hole merger it was the first ever direct detection of a binary black hole merger.[6]




Predicted appearance of non-rotating black hole with toroidal ring of ionised matter, such as has been proposed[7] as a model for Sagittarius A*. The asymmetry is due to the Doppler effect resulting from the enormous orbital speed needed for centrifugal balance of the very strong gravitational attraction of the hole.





Contents


1 History

1.1 General relativity
1.2 Golden age


2 Properties and structure

2.1 Physical properties
2.2 Event horizon
2.3 Singularity
2.4 Photon sphere
2.5 Ergosphere
2.6 Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)


3 Formation and evolution

3.1 Gravitational collapse

3.1.1 Primordial black holes in the Big Bang


3.2 High-energy collisions
3.3 Growth
3.4 Evaporation


4 Observational evidence

4.1 Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes
4.2 Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*
4.3 Accretion of matter
4.4 X-ray binaries

4.4.1 Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow
4.4.2 Quasi-periodic oscillations


4.5 Galactic nuclei
4.6 Microlensing (proposed)
4.7 Alternatives


5 Open questions

5.1 Entropy and thermodynamics
5.2 Information loss paradox


6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



History




Simulated view of a black hole in front of the Large Magellanic Cloud. Note the gravitational lensing effect, which produces two enlarged but highly distorted views of the Cloud. Across the top, the Milky Way disk appears distorted into an arc.


The idea of a body so massive that even light could not escape was first put forward by John Michell in a letter written in 1783 to Henry Cavendish of the Royal Society:

If the semi-diameter of a sphere of the same density as the Sun were to exceed that of the Sun in the proportion of 500 to 1, a body falling from an infinite height towards it would have acquired at its surface greater velocity than that of light, and consequently supposing light to be attracted by the same force in proportion to its vis inertiae, with other bodies, all light emitted from such a body would be made to return towards it by its own proper gravity.
— John Michell[8]

In 1796, mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace promoted the same idea in the first and second editions of his book Exposition du système du Monde (it was removed from later editions).[9][10] Such "dark stars" were largely ignored in the nineteenth century, since it was not understood how a massless wave such as light could be influenced by gravity.[11]
General relativity
In 1915, Albert Einstein developed his theory of general relativity, having earlier shown that gravity does influence light's motion. Only a few months later, Karl Schwarzschild found a solution to the Einstein field equations, which describes the gravitational field of a point mass and a spherical mass.[12] A few months after Schwarzschild, Johannes Droste, a student of Hendrik Lorentz, independently gave the same solution for the point mass and wrote more extensively about its properties.[13][14] This solution had a peculiar behaviour at what is now called the Schwarzschild radius, where it became singular, meaning that some of the terms in the Einstein equations became infinite. The nature of this surface was not quite understood at the time. In 1924, Arthur Eddington showed that the singularity disappeared after a change of coordinates (see Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates), although it took until 1933 for Georges Lemaître to realize that this meant the singularity at the Schwarzschild radius was an unphysical coordinate singularity.[15] Arthur Eddington did however comment on the possibility of a star with mass compressed to the Schwarzschild radius in a 1926 book, noting that Einstein's theory allows us to rule out overly large densities for visible stars like Betelgeuse because "a star of 250 million km radius could not possibly have so high a density as the sun. Firstly, the force of gravitation would be so great that light would be unable to escape from it, the rays falling back to the star like a stone to the earth. Secondly, the red shift of the spectral lines would be so great that the spectrum would be shifted out of existence. Thirdly, the mass would produce so much curvature of the space-time metric that space would close up around the star, leaving us outside (i.e., nowhere)."[16][17]
In 1931, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar calculated, using special relativity, that a non-rotating body of electron-degenerate matter above a certain limiting mass (now called the Chandrasekhar limit at 1.4 M☉) has no stable solutions.[18] His arguments were opposed by many of his contemporaries like Eddington and Lev Landau, who argued that some yet unknown mechanism would stop the collapse.[19] They were partly correct: a white dwarf slightly more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit will collapse into a neutron star,[20] which is itself stable because of the Pauli exclusion principle. But in 1939, Robert Oppenheimer and others predicted that neutron stars above approximately 3 M☉ (the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit) would collapse into black holes for the reasons presented by Chandrasekhar, and concluded that no law of physics was likely to intervene and stop at least some stars from collapsing to black holes.[21]
Oppenheimer and his co-authors interpreted the singularity at the boundary of the Schwarzschild radius as indicating that this was the boundary of a bubble in which time stopped. This is a valid point of view for external observers, but not for infalling observers. Because of this property, the collapsed stars were called "frozen stars",[22] because an outside observer would see the surface of the star frozen in time at the instant where its collapse takes it inside the Schwarzschild radius.
Golden age
See also: History of general relativity
In 1958, David Finkelstein identified the Schwarzschild surface as an event horizon, "a perfect unidirectional membrane: causal influences can cross it in only one direction".[23] This did not strictly contradict Oppenheimer's results, but extended them to include the point of view of infalling observers. Finkelstein's solution extended the Schwarzschild solution for the future of observers falling into a black hole. A complete extension had already been found by Martin Kruskal, who was urged to publish it.[24]
These results came at the beginning of the golden age of general relativity, which was marked by general relativity and black holes becoming mainstream subjects of research. This process was helped by the discovery of pulsars in 1967,[25][26] which, by 1969, were shown to be rapidly rotating neutron stars.[27] Until that time, neutron stars, like black holes, were regarded as just theoretical curiosities; but the discovery of pulsars showed their physical relevance and spurred a further interest in all types of compact objects that might be formed by gravitational collapse.
In this period more general black hole solutions were found. In 1963, Roy Kerr found the exact solution for a rotating black hole. Two years later, Ezra Newman found the axisymmetric solution for a black hole that is both rotating and electrically charged.[28] Through the work of Werner Israel,[29] Brandon Carter,[30][31] and David Robinson[32] the no-hair theorem emerged, stating that a stationary black hole solution is completely described by the three parameters of the Kerr–Newman metric: mass, angular momentum, and electric charge.[33]
At first, it was suspected that the strange features of the black hole solutions were pathological artifacts from the symmetry conditions imposed, and that the singularities would not appear in generic situations. This view was held in particular by Vladimir Belinsky, Isaak Khalatnikov, and Evgeny Lifshitz, who tried to prove that no singularities appear in generic solutions. However, in the late 1960s Roger Penrose[34] and Stephen Hawking used global techniques to prove that singularities appear generically.[35]
Work by James Bardeen, Jacob Bekenstein, Carter, and Hawking in the early 1970s led to the formulation of black hole thermodynamics.[36] These laws describe the behaviour of a black hole in close analogy to the laws of thermodynamics by relating mass to energy, area to entropy, and surface gravity to temperature. The analogy was completed when Hawking, in 1974, showed that quantum field theory predicts that black holes should radiate like a black body with a temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole.[37]
The first use of the term "black hole" in print was by journalist Ann Ewing in her article "'Black Holes' in Space", dated 18 January 1964, which was a report on a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.[38] John Wheeler used the term "black hole" at a lecture in 1967, leading some to credit him with coining the phrase. After Wheeler's use of the term, it was quickly adopted in general use.
Properties and structure
The no-hair theorem states that, once it achieves a stable condition after formation, a black hole has only three independent physical properties: mass, charge, and angular momentum.[33] Any two black holes that share the same values for these properties, or parameters, are indistinguishable according to classical (i.e. non-quantum) mechanics.
These properties are special because they are visible from outside a black hole. For example, a charged black hole repels other like charges just like any other charged object. Similarly, the total mass inside a sphere containing a black hole can be found by using the gravitational analog of Gauss's law, the ADM mass, far away from the black hole.[clarification needed][39] Likewise, the angular momentum can be measured from far away using frame dragging by the gravitomagnetic field.[clarification needed]
When an object falls into a black hole, any information about the shape of the object or distribution of charge on it is evenly distributed along the horizon of the black hole, and is lost to outside observers. The behavior of the horizon in this situation is a dissipative system that is closely analogous to that of a conductive stretchy membrane with friction and electrical resistance—the membrane paradigm.[40] This is different from other field theories such as electromagnetism, which do not have any friction or resistivity at the microscopic level, because they are time-reversible. Because a black hole eventually achieves a stable state with only three parameters, there is no way to avoid losing information about the initial conditions: the gravitational and electric fields of a black hole give very little information about what went in. The information that is lost includes every quantity that cannot be measured far away from the black hole horizon, including approximately conserved quantum numbers such as the total baryon number and lepton number. This behavior is so puzzling that it has been called the black hole information loss paradox.[41][42]
Physical properties




A simple illustration of a non-spinning black hole


The simplest static black holes have mass but neither electric charge nor angular momentum. These black holes are often referred to as Schwarzschild black holes after Karl Schwarzschild who discovered this solution in 1916.[12] According to Birkhoff's theorem, it is the only vacuum solution that is spherically symmetric.[43] This means that there is no observable difference between the gravitational field of such a black hole and that of any other spherical object of the same mass. The popular notion of a black hole "sucking in everything" in its surroundings is therefore only correct near a black hole's horizon; far away, the external gravitational field is identical to that of any other body of the same mass.[44]
Solutions describing more general black holes also exist. Non-rotating charged black holes are described by the Reissner–Nordström metric, while the Kerr metric describes a non-charged rotating black hole. The most general stationary black hole solution known is the Kerr–Newman metric, which describes a black hole with both charge and angular momentum.[45]
While the mass of a black hole can take any positive value, the charge and angular momentum are constrained by the mass. In Planck units, the total electric charge Q and the total angular momentum J are expected to satisfy



for a black hole of mass M. Black holes satisfying this inequality are called extremal. Solutions of Einstein's equations that violate this inequality exist, but they do not possess an event horizon. These solutions have so-called naked singularities that can be observed from the outside, and hence are deemed unphysical. The cosmic censorship hypothesis rules out the formation of such singularities, when they are created through the gravitational collapse of realistic matter.[2] This is supported by numerical simulations.[46]
Due to the relatively large strength of the electromagnetic force, black holes forming from the collapse of stars are expected to retain the nearly neutral charge of the star. Rotation, however, is expected to be a common feature of compact objects. The black-hole candidate binary X-ray source GRS 1915+105[47] appears to have an angular momentum near the maximum allowed value.

Black hole classifications

Class
Mass
Size


Supermassive black hole
~105–1010 MSun
~0.001–400 AU


Intermediate-mass black hole
~103 MSun
~103 km ≈ REarth


Stellar black hole
~10 MSun
~30 km


Micro black hole
up to ~MMoon
up to ~0.1 mm


Black holes are commonly classified according to their mass, independent of angular momentum J or electric charge Q. The size of a black hole, as determined by the radius of the event horizon, or Schwarzschild radius, is roughly proportional to the mass M through



where rsh is the Schwarzschild radius and MSun is the mass of the Sun.[48] This relation is exact only for black holes with zero charge and angular momentum; for more general black holes it can differ up to a factor of 2.
Event horizon
Main article: Event horizon



Far away from the black hole, a particle can move in any direction, as illustrated by the set of arrows. It is only restricted by the speed of light.



Closer to the black hole, spacetime starts to deform. There are more paths going towards the black hole than paths moving away.[Note 1]



Inside of the event horizon, all paths bring the particle closer to the center of the black hole. It is no longer possible for the particle to escape.


The defining feature of a black hole is the appearance of an event horizon—a boundary in spacetime through which matter and light can only pass inward towards the mass of the black hole. Nothing, not even light, can escape from inside the event horizon. The event horizon is referred to as such because if an event occurs within the boundary, information from that event cannot reach an outside observer, making it impossible to determine if such an event occurred.[50]
As predicted by general relativity, the presence of a mass deforms spacetime in such a way that the paths taken by particles bend towards the mass.[51] At the event horizon of a black hole, this deformation becomes so strong that there are no paths that lead away from the black hole.
To a distant observer, clocks near a black hole appear to tick more slowly than those further away from the black hole.[52] Due to this effect, known as gravitational time dilation, an object falling into a black hole appears to slow as it approaches the event horizon, taking an infinite time to reach it.[53] At the same time, all processes on this object slow down, from the view point of a fixed outside observer, causing any light emitted by the object to appear redder and dimmer, an effect known as gravitational redshift.[54] Eventually, the falling object becomes so dim that it can no longer be seen.
On the other hand, indestructible observers falling into a black hole do not notice any of these effects as they cross the event horizon. According to their own clocks, which appear to them to tick normally, they cross the event horizon after a finite time without noting any singular behaviour; it is impossible to determine the location of the event horizon from local observations.[55]
The shape of the event horizon of a black hole is always approximately spherical.[Note 2][58] For non-rotating (static) black holes the geometry of the event horizon is precisely spherical, while for rotating black holes the sphere is oblate.
Singularity
Main article: Gravitational singularity
At the center of a black hole, as described by general relativity, lies a gravitational singularity, a region where the spacetime curvature becomes infinite.[59] For a non-rotating black hole, this region takes the shape of a single point and for a rotating black hole, it is smeared out to form a ring singularity that lies in the plane of rotation.[60] In both cases, the singular region has zero volume. It can also be shown that the singular region contains all the mass of the black hole solution.[61] The singular region can thus be thought of as having infinite density.
Observers falling into a Schwarzschild black hole (i.e., non-rotating and not charged) cannot avoid being carried into the singularity, once they cross the event horizon. They can prolong the experience by accelerating away to slow their descent, but only up to a limit; after attaining a certain ideal velocity, it is best to free fall the rest of the way.[62] When they reach the singularity, they are crushed to infinite density and their mass is added to the total of the black hole. Before that happens, they will have been torn apart by the growing tidal forces in a process sometimes referred to as spaghettification or the "noodle effect".[63]
In the case of a charged (Reissner–Nordström) or rotating (Kerr) black hole, it is possible to avoid the singularity. Extending these solutions as far as possible reveals the hypothetical possibility of exiting the black hole into a different spacetime with the black hole acting as a wormhole.[64] The possibility of traveling to another universe is however only theoretical, since any perturbation would destroy this possibility.[65] It also appears to be possible to follow closed timelike curves (returning to one's own past) around the Kerr singularity, which lead to problems with causality like the grandfather paradox.[66] It is expected that none of these peculiar effects would survive in a proper quantum treatment of rotating and charged black holes.[67]
The appearance of singularities in general relativity is commonly perceived as signaling the breakdown of the theory.[68] This breakdown, however, is expected; it occurs in a situation where quantum effects should describe these actions, due to the extremely high density and therefore particle interactions. To date, it has not been possible to combine quantum and gravitational effects into a single theory, although there exist attempts to formulate such a theory of quantum gravity. It is generally expected that such a theory will not feature any singularities.[69][70]
Photon sphere
Main article: Photon sphere
The photon sphere is a spherical boundary of zero thickness in which photons that move on tangents to that sphere would be trapped in a circular orbit about the black hole. For non-rotating black holes, the photon sphere has a radius 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius. Their orbits would be dynamically unstable, hence any small perturbation, such as a particle of infalling matter, would cause an instability that would grow over time, either setting the photon on an outward trajectory causing it to escape the black hole, or on an inward spiral where it would eventually cross the event horizon.[71]
While light can still escape from the photon sphere, any light that crosses the photon sphere on an inbound trajectory will be captured by the black hole. Hence any light that reaches an outside observer from the photon sphere must have been emitted by objects between the photon sphere and the event horizon.[71]
Other compact objects, such as neutron stars, can also have photon spheres.[72] This follows from the fact that the gravitational field external to a spherically-symmetric object is governed by the Schwarzschild metric, which depends only on the object's mass rather than the radius of the object, hence any object whose radius shrinks to smaller than 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius will have a photon sphere.
Ergosphere
Main article: Ergosphere




The ergosphere is an oblate spheroid region outside of the event horizon, where objects cannot remain stationary.


Rotating black holes are surrounded by a region of spacetime in which it is impossible to stand still, called the ergosphere. This is the result of a process known as frame-dragging; general relativity predicts that any rotating mass will tend to slightly "drag" along the spacetime immediately surrounding it. Any object near the rotating mass will tend to start moving in the direction of rotation. For a rotating black hole, this effect is so strong near the event horizon that an object would have to move faster than the speed of light in the opposite direction to just stand still.[73]
The ergosphere of a black hole is a volume whose inner boundary is the black hole's event horizon and an outer boundary of an oblate spheroid, which coincides with the event horizon at the poles but noticeably wider around the equator. The outer boundary is sometimes called the ergosurface.
Objects and radiation can escape normally from the ergosphere. Through the Penrose process, objects can emerge from the ergosphere with more energy than they entered. This energy is taken from the rotational energy of the black hole causing the latter to slow.[74]
Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)
Main article: Innermost stable circular orbit
In Newtonian gravity, test particles can stably orbit at arbitrary distances from a central object. In general relativity, however, there exists an innermost stable circular orbit (often called the ISCO), inside of which, any infinitesimal perturbations to a circular orbit will lead to inspiral into the black hole.[75] The location of the ISCO depends on the spin of the black hole, in the case of a Schwarzschild black hole (spin zero) is:



and decreases with increasing spin.
Formation and evolution
Considering the exotic nature of black holes, it may be natural[clarification needed] to question if such bizarre objects could exist in nature or to suggest that they are merely pathological solutions to Einstein's equations. Einstein himself wrongly thought that black holes would not form, because he held that the angular momentum of collapsing particles would stabilize their motion at some radius.[76] This led the general relativity community to dismiss all results to the contrary for many years. However, a minority of relativists continued to contend that black holes were physical objects,[77] and by the end of the 1960s, they had persuaded the majority of researchers in the field that there is no obstacle to the formation of an event horizon.
Once an event horizon forms, Penrose proved, a singularity will form within.[34] Shortly afterwards, Hawking showed that many cosmological solutions that describe the Big Bang have singularities without scalar fields or other exotic matter (see "Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems").[clarification needed] The Kerr solution, the no-hair theorem, and the laws of black hole thermodynamics showed that the physical properties of black holes were simple and comprehensible, making them respectable subjects for research.[78] The primary formation process for black holes is expected to be the gravitational collapse of heavy objects such as stars, but there are also more exotic processes that can lead to the production of black holes.
Gravitational collapse
Main article: Gravitational collapse
Gravitational collapse occurs when an object's internal pressure is insufficient to resist the object's own gravity. For stars this usually occurs either because a star has too little "fuel" left to maintain its temperature through stellar nucleosynthesis, or because a star that would have been stable receives extra matter in a way that does not raise its core temperature. In either case the star's temperature is no longer high enough to prevent it from collapsing under its own weight.[79] The collapse may be stopped by the degeneracy pressure of the star's constituents, allowing the condensation of matter into an exotic denser state. The result is one of the various types of compact star. The type of compact star formed depends on the mass of the remnant of the original star left after the outer layers have been blown away. Such explosions, from a supernova explosion or by pulsations, leads to planetary nebula. Note that this mass can be substantially less than the original star. Remnants exceeding 5 M☉ are produced by stars that were over 20 M☉ before the collapse.[79]
If the mass of the remnant exceeds about 3–4 M☉ (the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit[21]), either because the original star was very heavy or because the remnant collected additional mass through accretion of matter, even the degeneracy pressure of neutrons is insufficient to stop the collapse. No known mechanism (except possibly quark degeneracy pressure, see quark star) is powerful enough to stop the implosion and the object will inevitably collapse to form a black hole.[79]
The gravitational collapse of heavy stars is assumed to be responsible for the formation of stellar mass black holes. Star formation in the early universe may have resulted in very massive stars, which upon their collapse would have produced black holes of up to 103 M☉. These black holes could be the seeds of the supermassive black holes found in the centers of most galaxies.[80]
While most of the energy released during gravitational collapse is emitted very quickly, an outside observer does not actually see the end of this process. Even though the collapse takes a finite amount of time from the reference frame of infalling matter, a distant observer would see the infalling material slow and halt just above the event horizon, due to gravitational time dilation. Light from the collapsing material takes longer and longer to reach the observer, with the light emitted just before the event horizon forms delayed an infinite amount of time. Thus the external observer never sees the formation of the event horizon; instead, the collapsing material seems to become dimmer and increasingly red-shifted, eventually fading away.[81]
Primordial black holes in the Big Bang
Gravitational collapse requires great density. In the current epoch of the universe these high densities are only found in stars, but in the early universe shortly after the big bang densities were much greater, possibly allowing for the creation of black holes. The high density alone is not enough to allow the formation of black holes since a uniform mass distribution will not allow the mass to bunch up. In order for primordial black holes to form in such a dense medium, there must be initial density perturbations that can then grow under their own gravity. Different models for the early universe vary widely in their predictions of the size of these perturbations. Various models predict the creation of black holes, ranging from a Planck mass to hundreds of thousands of solar masses.[82] Primordial black holes could thus account for the creation of any type of black hole.[clarification needed]
High-energy collisions




A simulated event in the CMS detector, a collision in which a micro black hole may be created.


Gravitational collapse is not the only process that could create black holes. In principle, black holes could be formed in high-energy collisions that achieve sufficient density. As of 2002, no such events have been detected, either directly or indirectly as a deficiency of the mass balance in particle accelerator experiments.[83] This suggests that there must be a lower limit for the mass of black holes. Theoretically, this boundary is expected to lie around the Planck mass (mP = √ħc/G ≈ 7019120000000000000♠1.2×1019 GeV/c2 ≈ 6992220000000000000♠2.2×10−8 kg), where quantum effects are expected to invalidate the predictions of general relativity.[84] This would put the creation of black holes firmly out of reach of any high-energy process occurring on or near the Earth. However, certain developments in quantum gravity suggest that the Planck mass could be much lower: some braneworld scenarios for example put the boundary as low as 7000100000000000000♠1 TeV/c2.[85] This would make it conceivable for micro black holes to be created in the high-energy collisions that occur when cosmic rays hit the Earth's atmosphere, or possibly in the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. These theories are very speculative, and the creation of black holes in these processes is deemed unlikely by many specialists.[86] Even if micro black holes could be formed, it is expected that they would evaporate in about 10−25 seconds, posing no threat to the Earth.[87]
Growth
Once a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing additional matter. Any black hole will continually absorb gas and interstellar dust from its surroundings and omnipresent cosmic background radiation. This is the primary process through which supermassive black holes seem to have grown.[80] A similar process has been suggested for the formation of intermediate-mass black holes found in globular clusters.[88]
Another possibility for black hole growth, is for a black hole to merge with other objects such as stars or even other black holes. Although not necessary for growth, this is thought to have been important, especially for the early development of supermassive black holes, which could have formed from the coagulation of many smaller objects.[80] The process has also been proposed as the origin of some intermediate-mass black holes.[89][90]
Evaporation
Main article: Hawking radiation
In 1974, Hawking predicted that black holes are not entirely black but emit small amounts of thermal radiation;[37] this effect has become known as Hawking radiation. By applying quantum field theory to a static black hole background, he determined that a black hole should emit particles that display a perfect black body spectrum. Since Hawking's publication, many others have verified the result through various approaches.[91] If Hawking's theory of black hole radiation is correct, then black holes are expected to shrink and evaporate over time as they lose mass by the emission of photons and other particles.[37] The temperature of this thermal spectrum (Hawking temperature) is proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, which, for a Schwarzschild black hole, is inversely proportional to the mass. Hence, large black holes emit less radiation than small black holes.[92]
A stellar black hole of 1 M☉ has a Hawking temperature of about 100 nanokelvins. This is far less than the 2.7 K temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation. Stellar-mass or larger black holes receive more mass from the cosmic microwave background than they emit through Hawking radiation and thus will grow instead of shrink.[citation needed] To have a Hawking temperature larger than 2.7 K (and be able to evaporate), a black hole would need a mass less than the Moon. Such a black hole would have a diameter of less than a tenth of a millimeter.[93]
If a black hole is very small, the radiation effects are expected to become very strong. Even a black hole that is heavy compared to a human would evaporate in an instant. A black hole with the mass of a car would have a diameter of about 10−24 m and take a nanosecond to evaporate, during which time it would briefly have a luminosity of more than 200 times that of the Sun. Lower-mass black holes are expected to evaporate even faster; for example, a black hole of mass 1 TeV/c2 would take less than 10−88 seconds to evaporate completely. For such a small black hole, quantum gravitation effects are expected to play an important role and could hypothetically make such a small black hole stable, although current developments in quantum gravity do not indicate so.[94][95]
The Hawking radiation for an astrophysical black hole is predicted to be very weak and would thus be exceedingly difficult to detect from Earth. A possible exception, however, is the burst of gamma rays emitted in the last stage of the evaporation of primordial black holes. Searches for such flashes have proven unsuccessful and provide stringent limits on the possibility of existence of low mass primordial black holes.[96] NASA's Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope launched in 2008 will continue the search for these flashes.[97]
Observational evidence




Gas cloud ripped apart by black hole at the centre of the Milky Way.[98]


By their very nature, black holes do not directly emit any electromagnetic radiation other than the hypothetical Hawking radiation, so astrophysicists searching for black holes must generally rely on indirect observations. For example, a black hole's existence can sometimes be inferred by observing its gravitational interactions with its surroundings. However, the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT), run by MIT's Haystack Observatory, is an attempt to directly observe the immediate environment of the event horizon of Sagittarius A*, the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way. The first image of the event horizon may appear as early as 2016.[99] The existence of magnetic fields just outside the event horizon of Sagittarius A*, which were predicted by theoretical studies of black holes, was confirmed by the EHT in 2015.[100][101]
Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes
On 24 September 2015 the LIGO gravitational wave observatory made the first-ever successful observation of gravitational waves.[6][102] The signal was consistent with theoretical predictions for the gravitational waves produced by the merger of two black holes: one with about 36 solar masses, and the other around 29 solar masses.[6][103] This observation provides the most concrete evidence for the existence of black holes to date. For instance, the gravitational wave signal suggests that the separation of the two object prior to merger was just 350 km (or roughly 4 times the Schwarzschild radius corresponding to the inferred masses). The objects must therefore have been extremely compact, leaving black holes as the most plausible interpretation.[6]
More importantly, the signal observed by LIGO also included the start of the post-merger ringdown, the signal produced as the newly formed compact object settles down to a stationary state. Arguably, the ringdown is the most direct way of observing a black hole.[104] From the LIGO signal it is possible to extract the frequency and damping time of the dominant mode of the ringdown. From these it is possible to infer the mass and angular momentum of the final object, which match independent predictions from numerical simulations of the merger.[105] The frequency and decay time of the dominant mode are determined by the geometry of the photon sphere. Hence, observation of this mode confirms the presence of a photon sphere, however it cannot exclude possible exotic alternatives to black holes that are compact enough to have a photon sphere.[104]
The observation also provides the first observational evidence for the existence of stellar-mass black hole binaries. Furthermore, it is the first observational evidence of stellar-mass black holes weighing 25 solar masses or more.[106]
Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*
The proper motions of stars near the center of our own Milky Way provide strong observational evidence that these stars are orbiting a supermassive black hole.[107] Since 1995, astronomers have tracked the motions of 90 stars orbiting an invisible object coincident with the radio source Sagittarius A*. By fitting their motions to Keplerian orbits, the astronomers were able to infer, in 1998, that a 2.6 million M☉ object must be contained in a volume with a radius of 0.02 light-years to cause the motions of those stars.[108] Since then, one of the stars—called S2—has completed a full orbit. From the orbital data, astronomers were able to make refine the calculations of the mass to 4.3 million M☉ and a radius of less than 0.002 lightyears for the object causing the orbital motion of those stars.[107] The upper limit on the object's size is still too large to test whether it is smaller than its Schwarzschild radius; nevertheless, these observations strongly suggest that the central object is a supermassive black hole as there are no other plausible scenarios for confining so much invisible mass into such a small volume.[108] Additionally, there is some observational evidence that this object might possess an event horizon, a feature unique to black holes.[109]
Accretion of matter
See also: Accretion disc




Black hole with corona, X-ray source (artist's concept).[110]


Due to conservation of angular momentum, gas falling into the gravitational well created by a massive object will typically form a disc-like structure around the object. Artists' impressions such as the accompanying representation of a black hole with corona commonly depict the black hole as if it were a flat-space material body hiding the part of the disc just behind it, but detailed mathematical modelling[111] shows that the image of the disc would actually be distorted by the bending of light that originated behind the black hole in such a way that the upper side of the disc would be entirely visible, while there would be a partially visible secondary image of the underside of the disk.




Predicted view from outside the horizon of a Schwarzschild black hole lit by a thin accretion disc


Within such a disc, friction would cause angular momentum to be transported outward, allowing matter to fall further inward, thus releasing potential energy and increasing the temperature of the gas.[112]




Blurring of X-rays near Black hole (NuSTAR; 12 August 2014).[110]


When the accreting object is a neutron star or a black hole, the gas in the inner accretion disc orbits at very high speeds because of its proximity to the compact object. The resulting friction is so significant that it heats the inner disc to temperatures at which it emits vast amounts of electromagnetic radiation (mainly X-rays). These bright X-ray sources may be detected by telescopes. This process of accretion is one of the most efficient energy-producing processes known; up to 40% of the rest mass of the accreted material can be emitted as radiation.[112] (In nuclear fusion only about 0.7% of the rest mass will be emitted as energy.) In many cases, accretion discs are accompanied by relativistic jets that are emitted along the poles, which carry away much of the energy. The mechanism for the creation of these jets is currently not well understood.
As such, many of the universe's more energetic phenomena have been attributed to the accretion of matter on black holes. In particular, active galactic nuclei and quasars are believed to be the accretion discs of supermassive black holes.[113] Similarly, X-ray binaries are generally accepted to be binary star systems in which one of the two stars is a compact object accreting matter from its companion.[113] It has also been suggested that some ultraluminous X-ray sources may be the accretion disks of intermediate-mass black holes.[114]
In November 2011 the first direct observation of a quasar accretion disk around a supermassive black hole was reported.[115][116]
X-ray binaries
See also: X-ray binary


Play media


A computer simulation of a star being consumed by a black hole. The blue dot indicates the location of the black hole.






A Chandra X-Ray Observatory image of Cygnus X-1, which was the first strong black hole candidate discovered


X-ray binaries are binary star systems that emit a majority of their radiation in the X-ray part of the spectrum. These X-ray emissions are generally thought to result when one of the stars (compact object) accretes matter from another (regular) star. The presence of an ordinary star in such a system provides a unique opportunity for studying the central object and to determine if it might be a black hole.


Play media


This animation compares the X-ray 'heartbeats' of GRS 1915 and IGR J17091, two black holes that ingest gas from companion stars.


If such a system emits signals that can be directly traced back to the compact object, it cannot be a black hole. The absence of such a signal does, however, not exclude the possibility that the compact object is a neutron star. By studying the companion star it is often possible to obtain the orbital parameters of the system and to obtain an estimate for the mass of the compact object. If this is much larger than the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit (that is, the maximum mass a neutron star can have before it collapses) then the object cannot be a neutron star and is generally expected to be a black hole.[113]
The first strong candidate for a black hole, Cygnus X-1, was discovered in this way by Charles Thomas Bolton,[117] Louise Webster and Paul Murdin[118] in 1972.[119][120] Some doubt, however, remained due to the uncertainties that result from the companion star being much heavier than the candidate black hole.[113] Currently, better candidates for black holes are found in a class of X-ray binaries called soft X-ray transients.[113] In this class of system, the companion star is of relatively low mass allowing for more accurate estimates of the black hole mass. Moreover, these systems are actively emit X-rays for only several months once every 10–50 years. During the period of low X-ray emission (called quiescence), the accretion disc is extremely faint allowing detailed observation of the companion star during this period. One of the best such candidates is V404 Cyg.
Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow
The faintness of the accretion disc of an X-ray binary during quiescence is suspected to be caused by the flow of mass entering a mode called an advection-dominated accretion flow (ADAF). In this mode, almost all the energy generated by friction in the disc is swept along with the flow instead of radiated away. If this model is correct, then it forms strong qualitative evidence for the presence of an event horizon,[121] since if the object at the center of the disc had a solid surface, it would emit large amounts of radiation as the highly energetic gas hits the surface,[clarification needed] an effect that is observed for neutron stars in a similar state.[112]
Quasi-periodic oscillations
Main article: Quasi-periodic oscillations
The X-ray emissions from accretion disks sometimes flicker at certain frequencies. These signals are called quasi-periodic oscillations and are thought to be caused by material moving along the inner edge of the accretion disk (the innermost stable circular orbit). As such their frequency is linked to the mass of the compact object. They can thus be used as an alternative way to determine the mass of candidate black holes.[122]
Galactic nuclei
See also: Active galactic nucleus




Magnetic waves, called Alfvén S-waves, flow from the base of black hole jets.



Astronomers use the term "active galaxy" to describe galaxies with unusual characteristics, such as unusual spectral line emission and very strong radio emission. Theoretical and observational studies have shown that the activity in these active galactic nuclei (AGN) may be explained by the presence of supermassive black holes, which can be millions of times more massive than stellar ones. The models of these AGN consist of a central black hole that may be millions or billions of times more massive than the Sun; a disk of gas and dust called an accretion disk; and two jets perpendicular to the accretion disk.[123][124]




Detection of unusually bright X-Ray flare from Sagittarius A*, a black hole in the center of the Milky Way galaxy on 5 January 2015.[125]


Although supermassive black holes are expected to be found in most AGN, only some galaxies' nuclei have been more carefully studied in attempts to both identify and measure the actual masses of the central supermassive black hole candidates. Some of the most notable galaxies with supermassive black hole candidates include the Andromeda Galaxy, M32, M87, NGC 3115, NGC 3377, NGC 4258, NGC 4889, NGC 1277, OJ 287, APM 08279+5255 and the Sombrero Galaxy.[126]
It is now widely accepted that the center of nearly every galaxy, not just active ones, contains a supermassive black hole.[127] The close observational correlation between the mass of this hole and the velocity dispersion of the host galaxy's bulge, known as the M-sigma relation, strongly suggests a connection between the formation of the black hole and the galaxy itself.[128]




Simulation of gas cloud after close approach to the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way.[129]


Microlensing (proposed)
Another way that the black hole nature of an object may be tested in the future is through observation of effects caused by a strong gravitational field in their vicinity. One such effect is gravitational lensing: The deformation of spacetime around a massive object causes light rays to be deflected much as light passing through an optic lens. Observations have been made of weak gravitational lensing, in which light rays are deflected by only a few arcseconds. However, it has never been directly observed for a black hole.[130] One possibility for observing gravitational lensing by a black hole would be to observe stars in orbit around the black hole. There are several candidates for such an observation in orbit around Sagittarius A*.[130]
Alternatives
See also: Exotic star
The evidence for stellar black holes strongly relies on the existence of an upper limit for the mass of a neutron star. The size of this limit heavily depends on the assumptions made about the properties of dense matter. New exotic phases of matter could push up this bound.[113] A phase of free quarks at high density might allow the existence of dense quark stars,[131] and some supersymmetric models predict the existence of Q stars.[132] Some extensions of the standard model posit the existence of preons as fundamental building blocks of quarks and leptons, which could hypothetically form preon stars.[133] These hypothetical models could potentially explain a number of observations of stellar black hole candidates. However, it can be shown from arguments in general relativity that any such object will have a maximum mass.[113]
Since the average density of a black hole inside its Schwarzschild radius is inversely proportional to the square of its mass, supermassive black holes are much less dense than stellar black holes (the average density of a 108 M☉ black hole is comparable to that of water).[113] Consequently, the physics of matter forming a supermassive black hole is much better understood and the possible alternative explanations for supermassive black hole observations are much more mundane. For example, a supermassive black hole could be modelled by a large cluster of very dark objects. However, such alternatives are typically not stable enough to explain the supermassive black hole candidates.[113]
The evidence for the existence of stellar and supermassive black holes implies that in order for black holes to not form, general relativity must fail as a theory of gravity, perhaps due to the onset of quantum mechanical corrections. A much anticipated feature of a theory of quantum gravity is that it will not feature singularities or event horizons and thus black holes would not be real artifacts.[134] In 2002,[135] much attention has been drawn by the fuzzball model in string theory. Based on calculations for specific situations in string theory, the proposal suggests that generically the individual states of a black hole solution do not have an event horizon or singularity, but that for a classical/semi-classical observer the statistical average of such states appears just as an ordinary black hole as deduced from general relativity.[136]
Open questions
Entropy and thermodynamics
Further information: Black hole thermodynamics




The formula for the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy (S) of a black hole, which depends on the area of the black hole (A). The constants are the speed of light (c), the Boltzmann constant (k), Newton's constant (G), and the reduced Planck constant (ħ).


In 1971, Hawking showed under general conditions[Note 3] that the total area of the event horizons of any collection of classical black holes can never decrease, even if they collide and merge.[137] This result, now known as the second law of black hole mechanics, is remarkably similar to the second law of thermodynamics, which states that the total entropy of a system can never decrease. As with classical objects at absolute zero temperature, it was assumed that black holes had zero entropy. If this were the case, the second law of thermodynamics would be violated by entropy-laden matter entering a black hole, resulting in a decrease of the total entropy of the universe. Therefore, Bekenstein proposed that a black hole should have an entropy, and that it should be proportional to its horizon area.[138]
The link with the laws of thermodynamics was further strengthened by Hawking's discovery that quantum field theory predicts that a black hole radiates blackbody radiation at a constant temperature. This seemingly causes a violation of the second law of black hole mechanics, since the radiation will carry away energy from the black hole causing it to shrink. The radiation, however also carries away entropy, and it can be proven under general assumptions that the sum of the entropy of the matter surrounding a black hole and one quarter of the area of the horizon as measured in Planck units is in fact always increasing. This allows the formulation of the first law of black hole mechanics as an analogue of the first law of thermodynamics, with the mass acting as energy, the surface gravity as temperature and the area as entropy.[138]
One puzzling feature is that the entropy of a black hole scales with its area rather than with its volume, since entropy is normally an extensive quantity that scales linearly with the volume of the system. This odd property led Gerard 't Hooft and Leonard Susskind to propose the holographic principle, which suggests that anything that happens in a volume of spacetime can be described by data on the boundary of that volume.[139]
Although general relativity can be used to perform a semi-classical calculation of black hole entropy, this situation is theoretically unsatisfying. In statistical mechanics, entropy is understood as counting the number of microscopic configurations of a system that have the same macroscopic qualities (such as mass, charge, pressure, etc.). Without a satisfactory theory of quantum gravity, one cannot perform such a computation for black holes. Some progress has been made in various approaches to quantum gravity. In 1995, Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa showed that counting the microstates of a specific supersymmetric black hole in string theory reproduced the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy.[140] Since then, similar results have been reported for different black holes both in string theory and in other approaches to quantum gravity like loop quantum gravity.[141]
Information loss paradox
Main article: Black hole information paradox



Unsolved problem in physics:
Is physical information lost in black holes?
(more unsolved problems in physics)



Because a black hole has only a few internal parameters, most of the information about the matter that went into forming the black hole is lost. Regardless of the type of matter which goes into a black hole, it appears that only information concerning the total mass, charge, and angular momentum are conserved. As long as black holes were thought to persist forever this information loss is not that problematic, as the information can be thought of as existing inside the black hole, inaccessible from the outside. However, black holes slowly evaporate by emitting Hawking radiation. This radiation does not appear to carry any additional information about the matter that formed the black hole, meaning that this information appears to be gone forever.[142]
The question whether information is truly lost in black holes (the black hole information paradox) has divided the theoretical physics community (see Thorne–Hawking–Preskill bet). In quantum mechanics, loss of information corresponds to the violation of vital property called unitarity, which has to do with the conservation of probability. It has been argued that loss of unitarity would also imply violation of conservation of energy.[143] Over recent years evidence has been building that indeed information and unitarity are preserved in a full quantum gravitational treatment of the problem.[144]
See also




Cosmology portal



Star portal



Astronomy portal





List of nearest black holes
Black brane
Black hole complementarity
Black hole starship
Black holes in fiction
Black string
BTZ black hole
Dumb hole
General relativity
Kugelblitz (astrophysics)
List of black holes
Susskind-Hawking battle
Timeline of black hole physics
White hole
Wormhole


Notes

^ The set of possible paths, or more accurately the future light cone containing all possible world lines (in this diagram the light cone is represented by the V-shaped region bounded by arrows representing light ray world lines), is tilted in this way in Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates (the diagram is a "cartoon" version of an Eddington–Finkelstein coordinate diagram), but in other coordinates the light cones are not tilted in this way, for example in Schwarzschild coordinates they simply narrow without tilting as one approaches the event horizon, and in Kruskal–Szekeres coordinates the light cones don't change shape or orientation at all.[49]
^ This is true only for 4-dimensional spacetimes. In higher dimensions more complicated horizon topologies like a black ring are possible.[56][57]
^ In particular, he assumed that all matter satisfies the weak energy condition.

References


^ Wald 1984, pp. 299–300
^ a b Wald, R. M. (1997). "Gravitational Collapse and Cosmic Censorship". arXiv:gr-qc/9710068 [gr-qc]. 
^ Overbye, Dennis (8 June 2015). "Black Hole Hunters". NASA. Retrieved 8 June 2015. 
^ Schutz, Bernard F. (2003). Gravity from the ground up. Cambridge University Press. p. 110. ISBN 0-521-45506-5. 
^ Davies, P. C. W. (1978). "Thermodynamics of Black Holes" (PDF). Reports on Progress in Physics 41 (8): 1313–1355. Bibcode:1978RPPh...41.1313D. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/41/8/004. 
^ a b c d Abbott, B.P.; et al. (2016). "Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger". Phys. Rev. Lett. 116: 061102. arXiv:1602.03837. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102. 
^ O. Straub, F.H. Vincent, M.A. Abramowicz, E. Gourgoulhon, T. Paumard, ``Modelling the black hole silhouette in Sgr A* with ion tori,Astron. Astroph 543 (2012) A8
^ Michell, J. (1784). "On the Means of Discovering the Distance, Magnitude, &c. of the Fixed Stars, in Consequence of the Diminution of the Velocity of Their Light, in Case Such a Diminution Should be Found to Take Place in any of Them, and Such Other Data Should be Procured from Observations, as Would be Farther Necessary for That Purpose". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 74 (0): 35–57. Bibcode:1784RSPT...74...35M. doi:10.1098/rstl.1784.0008. JSTOR 106576. 
^ Gillispie, C. C. (2000). Pierre-Simon Laplace, 1749–1827: a life in exact science. Princeton paperbacks. Princeton University Press. p. 175. ISBN 0-691-05027-9. 
^ Israel, W. (1989). "Dark stars: the evolution of an idea". In Hawking, S. W.; Israel, W. 300 Years of Gravitation. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-37976-2. 
^ Thorne 1994, pp. 123–124
^ a b Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Massenpunktes nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 7: 189–196.  and Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Kugel aus inkompressibler Flüssigkeit nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 18: 424–434. 
^ Droste, J. (1917). "On the field of a single centre in Einstein's theory of gravitation, and the motion of a particle in that field" (PDF). Proceedings Royal Academy Amsterdam 19 (1): 197–215. 
^ Kox, A. J. (1992). "General Relativity in the Netherlands: 1915–1920". In Eisenstaedt, J.; Kox, A. J. Studies in the history of general relativity. Birkhäuser. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-8176-3479-7. [dead link]
^ 't Hooft, G. (2009). "Introduction to the Theory of Black Holes" (PDF). Institute for Theoretical Physics / Spinoza Institute: 47–48. 
^ Eddington, Arthur (1926). The Internal Constitution of the Stars. Cambridge University Press. p. 6. 
^ Kip Thorne comments on this quote on pages 134-135 of his book Black Holes and Time Warps, writing that "The first conclusion was the Newtonian version of light not escaping; the second was a semi-accurate, relativistic description; and the third was typical Eddingtonian hyperbole ... when a star is as small as the critical circumference, the curvature is strong but not infinite, and space is definitely not wrapped around the star. Eddington may have known this, but his description made a good story, and it captured in a whimsical way the spirit of Schwarzschild's spacetime curvature."
^ Venkataraman, G. (1992). Chandrasekhar and his limit. Universities Press. p. 89. ISBN 81-7371-035-X. 
^ Detweiler, S. (1981). "Resource letter BH-1: Black holes". American Journal of Physics 49 (5): 394–400. Bibcode:1981AmJPh..49..394D. doi:10.1119/1.12686. 
^ Harpaz, A. (1994). Stellar evolution. A K Peters. p. 105. ISBN 1-56881-012-1. 
^ a b Oppenheimer, J. R.; Volkoff, G. M. (1939). "On Massive Neutron Cores". Physical Review 55 (4): 374–381. Bibcode:1939PhRv...55..374O. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.55.374. 
^ Ruffini, R.; Wheeler, J. A. (1971). "Introducing the black hole" (PDF). Physics Today 24 (1): 30–41. Bibcode:1971PhT....24a..30R. doi:10.1063/1.3022513. 
^ Finkelstein, D. (1958). "Past-Future Asymmetry of the Gravitational Field of a Point Particle". Physical Review 110 (4): 965–967. Bibcode:1958PhRv..110..965F. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.110.965. 
^ Kruskal, M. (1960). "Maximal Extension of Schwarzschild Metric". Physical Review 119 (5): 1743. Bibcode:1960PhRv..119.1743K. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.119.1743. 
^ Hewish, A.; et al. (1968). "Observation of a Rapidly Pulsating Radio Source". Nature 217 (5130): 709–713. Bibcode:1968Natur.217..709H. doi:10.1038/217709a0 
^ Pilkington, J. D. H.; et al. (1968). "Observations of some further Pulsed Radio Sources". Nature 218 (5137): 126–129. Bibcode:1968Natur.218..126P. doi:10.1038/218126a0 
^ Hewish, A. (1970). "Pulsars". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 8 (1): 265–296. Bibcode:1970ARA&A...8..265H. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.08.090170.001405. 
^ Newman, E. T.; et al. (1965). "Metric of a Rotating, Charged Mass". Journal of Mathematical Physics 6 (6): 918. Bibcode:1965JMP.....6..918N. doi:10.1063/1.1704351 
^ Israel, W. (1967). "Event Horizons in Static Vacuum Space-Times". Physical Review 164 (5): 1776. Bibcode:1967PhRv..164.1776I. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.164.1776. 
^ Carter, B. (1971). "Axisymmetric Black Hole Has Only Two Degrees of Freedom". Physical Review Letters 26 (6): 331. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26..331C. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.331. 
^ Carter, B. (1977). "The vacuum black hole uniqueness theorem and its conceivable generalisations". Proceedings of the 1st Marcel Grossmann meeting on general relativity. pp. 243–254. 
^ Robinson, D. (1975). "Uniqueness of the Kerr Black Hole". Physical Review Letters 34 (14): 905. Bibcode:1975PhRvL..34..905R. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.34.905. 
^ a b Heusler, M. (1998). "Stationary Black Holes: Uniqueness and Beyond". Living Reviews in Relativity 1 (6). doi:10.12942/lrr-1998-6. Archived from the original on 1999-02-03. Retrieved 2011-02-08. 
^ a b Penrose, R. (1965). "Gravitational Collapse and Space-Time Singularities". Physical Review Letters 14 (3): 57. Bibcode:1965PhRvL..14...57P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.14.57. 
^ Ford, L. H. (2003). "The Classical Singularity Theorems and Their Quantum Loopholes". International Journal of Theoretical Physics 42 (6): 1219. doi:10.1023/A:1025754515197. 
^ Bardeen, J. M.; Carter, B.; Hawking, S. W. (1973). "The four laws of black hole mechanics". Communications in Mathematical Physics 31 (2): 161–170. Bibcode:1973CMaPh..31..161B. doi:10.1007/BF01645742. MR MR0334798. Zbl 1125.83309. 
^ a b c Hawking, S. W. (1974). "Black hole explosions?". Nature 248 (5443): 30–31. Bibcode:1974Natur.248...30H. doi:10.1038/248030a0. 
^ Quinion, M. (26 April 2008). "Black Hole". World Wide Words. Retrieved 2008-06-17. 
^ Carroll 2004, p. 253
^ Thorne, K. S.; Price, R. H. (1986). Black holes: the membrane paradigm. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-03770-8. 
^ Anderson, Warren G. (1996). "The Black Hole Information Loss Problem". Usenet Physics FAQ. Retrieved 2009-03-24. 
^ Preskill, J. (1994-10-21). Black holes and information: A crisis in quantum physics (PDF). Caltech Theory Seminar. 
^ Hawking & Ellis 1973, Appendix B
^ Seeds, Michael A.; Backman, Dana E. (2007). Perspectives on Astronomy. Cengage Learning. p. 167. ISBN 0-495-11352-2 
^ Shapiro, S. L.; Teukolsky, S. A. (1983). Black holes, white dwarfs, and neutron stars: the physics of compact objects. John Wiley and Sons. p. 357. ISBN 0-471-87316-0. 
^ Berger, B. K. (2002). "Numerical Approaches to Spacetime Singularities". Living Reviews in Relativity 5: 1. arXiv:gr-qc/0201056. Bibcode:2002LRR.....5....1B. doi:10.12942/lrr-2002-1. Retrieved 2007-08-04. 
^ McClintock, J. E.; Shafee, R.; Narayan, R.; Remillard, R. A.; Davis, S. W.; Li, L.-X. (2006). "The Spin of the Near-Extreme Kerr Black Hole GRS 1915+105". Astrophysical Journal 652 (1): 518–539. arXiv:astro-ph/0606076. Bibcode:2006ApJ...652..518M. doi:10.1086/508457. 
^ Wald 1984, pp. 124–125
^ Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973, p. 848
^ Wheeler 2007, p. 179
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 5.4 and 7.3
^ Carroll 2004, p. 217
^ Carroll 2004, p. 218
^ "Inside a black hole". Knowing the universe and its secrets. Retrieved 2009-03-26. 
^ Carroll 2004, p. 222
^ Emparan, R.; Reall, H. S. (2008). "Black Holes in Higher Dimensions". Living Reviews in Relativity 11 (6). arXiv:0801.3471. Bibcode:2008LRR....11....6E. doi:10.12942/lrr-2008-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10. 
^ Obers, N. A. (2009). Papantonopoulos, Eleftherios, ed. "Black Holes in Higher-Dimensional Gravity". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 211–258. arXiv:0802.0519. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0. 
^ hawking & ellis 1973, Ch. 9.3
^ Carroll 2004, p. 205
^ Carroll 2004, pp. 264–265
^ Carroll 2004, p. 252
^ Lewis, G. F.; Kwan, J. (2007). "No Way Back: Maximizing Survival Time Below the Schwarzschild Event Horizon". Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 24 (2): 46–52. arXiv:0705.1029. Bibcode:2007PASA...24...46L. doi:10.1071/AS07012. 
^ Wheeler 2007, p. 182
^ Carroll 2004, pp. 257–259 and 265–266
^ Droz, S.; Israel, W.; Morsink, S. M. (1996). "Black holes: the inside story". Physics World 9 (1): 34–37. Bibcode:1996PhyW....9...34D. 
^ Carroll 2004, p. 266
^ Poisson, E.; Israel, W. (1990). "Internal structure of black holes". Physical Review D 41 (6): 1796. Bibcode:1990PhRvD..41.1796P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.41.1796. 
^ Wald 1984, p. 212
^ Hamade, R. (1996). "Black Holes and Quantum Gravity". Cambridge Relativity and Cosmology. University of Cambridge. Retrieved 2009-03-26. 
^ Palmer, D. "Ask an Astrophysicist: Quantum Gravity and Black Holes". NASA. Retrieved 2009-03-26. 
^ a b Nitta, Daisuke; Chiba, Takeshi; Sugiyama, Naoshi (September 2011). "Shadows of colliding black holes". Physical Review D 84 (6). arXiv:1106.2425. Bibcode:2011PhRvD..84f3008N. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.84.063008 
^ Nemiroff, R. J. (1993). "Visual distortions near a neutron star and black hole". American Journal of Physics 61 (7): 619. arXiv:astro-ph/9312003. Bibcode:1993AmJPh..61..619N. doi:10.1119/1.17224. 
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.6
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.7
^ Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973
^ Einstein, A. (1939). "On A Stationary System With Spherical Symmetry Consisting of Many Gravitating Masses". Annals of Mathematics 40 (4): 922–936. doi:10.2307/1968902. JSTOR 1968902. 
^ Kerr, R. P. (2009). "The Kerr and Kerr-Schild metrics". In Wiltshire, D. L.; Visser, M.; Scott, S. M. The Kerr Spacetime. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:0706.1109. ISBN 978-0-521-88512-6. 
^ Hawking, S. W.; Penrose, R. (January 1970). "The Singularities of Gravitational Collapse and Cosmology". Proceedings of the Royal Society A 314 (1519): 529–548. Bibcode:1970RSPSA.314..529H. doi:10.1098/rspa.1970.0021. JSTOR 2416467. 
^ a b c Carroll 2004, Section 5.8
^ a b c Rees, M. J.; Volonteri, M. (2007). "Massive black holes: formation and evolution". In Karas, V.; Matt, G. Black Holes from Stars to Galaxies—Across the Range of Masses. Cambridge University Press. pp. 51–58. arXiv:astro-ph/0701512. ISBN 978-0-521-86347-6. 
^ Penrose, R. (2002). "Gravitational Collapse: The Role of General Relativity" (PDF). General Relativity and Gravitation 34 (7): 1141. Bibcode:2002GReGr..34.1141P. doi:10.1023/A:1016578408204. 
^ Carr, B. J. (2005). "Primordial Black Holes: Do They Exist and Are They Useful?". In Suzuki, H.; Yokoyama, J.; Suto, Y.; Sato, K. Inflating Horizon of Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology. Universal Academy Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0511743. ISBN 4-946443-94-0. 
^ Giddings, S. B.; Thomas, S. (2002). "High energy colliders as black hole factories: The end of short distance physics". Physical Review D 65 (5): 056010. arXiv:hep-ph/0106219. Bibcode:2002PhRvD..65e6010G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.65.056010. 
^ Harada, T. (2006). "Is there a black hole minimum mass?". Physical Review D 74 (8): 084004. arXiv:gr-qc/0609055. Bibcode:2006PhRvD..74h4004H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.74.084004. 
^ Arkani–Hamed, N.; Dimopoulos, S.; Dvali, G. (1998). "The hierarchy problem and new dimensions at a millimeter". Physics Letters B 429 (3–4): 263. arXiv:hep-ph/9803315. Bibcode:1998PhLB..429..263A. doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(98)00466-3. 
^ LHC Safety Assessment Group. "Review of the Safety of LHC Collisions" (PDF). CERN. 
^ Cavaglià, M. (2010). "Particle accelerators as black hole factories?". Einstein-Online (Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute)) 4: 1010. 
^ Vesperini, E.; McMillan, S. L. W.; d'Ercole, A.; et al. (2010). "Intermediate-Mass Black Holes in Early Globular Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 713 (1): L41–L44. arXiv:1003.3470. Bibcode:2010ApJ...713L..41V. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/713/1/L41. 
^ Zwart, S. F. P.; Baumgardt, H.; Hut, P.; et al. (2004). "Formation of massive black holes through runaway collisions in dense young star clusters". Nature 428 (6984): 724–6. arXiv:astro-ph/0402622. Bibcode:2004Natur.428..724P. doi:10.1038/nature02448. PMID 15085124. 
^ O'Leary, R. M.; Rasio, F. A.; Fregeau, J. M.; et al. (2006). "Binary Mergers and Growth of Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal 637 (2): 937. arXiv:astro-ph/0508224. Bibcode:2006ApJ...637..937O. doi:10.1086/498446. 
^ Page, D. N. (2005). "Hawking radiation and black hole thermodynamics". New Journal of Physics 7: 203. arXiv:hep-th/0409024. Bibcode:2005NJPh....7..203P. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/7/1/203. 
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 9.6
^ "Evaporating black holes?". Einstein online. Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics. 2010. Retrieved 2010-12-12. 
^ Giddings, S. B.; Mangano, M. L. (2008). "Astrophysical implications of hypothetical stable TeV-scale black holes". Physical Review D 78 (3): 035009. arXiv:0806.3381. Bibcode:2008PhRvD..78c5009G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.78.035009. 
^ Peskin, M. E. (2008). "The end of the world at the Large Hadron Collider?". Physics 1: 14. Bibcode:2008PhyOJ...1...14P. doi:10.1103/Physics.1.14. 
^ Fichtel, C. E.; Bertsch, D. L.; Dingus, B. L.; et al. (1994). "Search of the energetic gamma-ray experiment telescope (EGRET) data for high-energy gamma-ray microsecond bursts". Astrophysical Journal 434 (2): 557–559. Bibcode:1994ApJ...434..557F. doi:10.1086/174758. 
^ Naeye, R. "Testing Fundamental Physics". NASA. Retrieved 2008-09-16. 
^ "Ripped Apart by a Black Hole". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 19 July 2013. 
^ O'Neill, Ian (2 July 2015). "Event Horizon Telescope Will Probe Spacetime's Mysteries". Discovery News. Retrieved 6 December 2015. 
^ Johnson, M. D.; Fish, V. L.; Doeleman, S. S.; Marrone, D. P.; Plambeck, R. L.; Wardle, J. F. C.; Akiyama, K.; Asada, K.; Beaudoin, C. (2015-12-04). "Resolved magnetic-field structure and variability near the event horizon of Sagittarius A*". Science 350 (6265): 1242–1245. arXiv:1512.01220. Bibcode:2015Sci...350.1242J. doi:10.1126/science.aac7087. ISSN 0036-8075. 
^ "Event Horizon Telescope Reveals Magnetic Fields at Milky Way's Central Black Hole". cfa.harvard.edu. 3 December 2015. Retrieved 12 January 2016. 
^ Overbye, Dennis (11 February 2016). "Physicists Detect Gravitational Waves, Proving Einstein Right". New York Times. Retrieved 11 February 2016. 
^ Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Properties of the binary black hole merger GW150914". arXiv:1602.03840. 
^ a b Cardoso, V., Franzin, E., and Pani, P. (2016). "Is the gravitational-wave ringdown a probe of the event horizon?". Physical Review Letters. arXiv:1602.07309. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Tests of general relativity with GW150914". LIGO. Retrieved 12 February 2016. 
^ "Astrophysical Implications of the Binary Black Hole Merger GW150914". Astrophys. J. Lett. 818 (2): L22. arXiv:1602.03846. Bibcode:2016ApJ...818L..22A. doi:10.3847/2041-8205/818/2/L22. 
^ a b Gillessen, S.; Eisenhauer, F.; Trippe, S.; et al. (2009). "Monitoring Stellar Orbits around the Massive Black Hole in the Galactic Center". The Astrophysical Journal 692 (2): 1075. arXiv:0810.4674. Bibcode:2009ApJ...692.1075G. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/692/2/1075. 
^ a b Ghez, A. M.; Klein, B. L.; Morris, M.; et al. (1998). "High Proper‐Motion Stars in the Vicinity of Sagittarius A*: Evidence for a Supermassive Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy". The Astrophysical Journal 509 (2): 678. arXiv:astro-ph/9807210. Bibcode:1998ApJ...509..678G. doi:10.1086/306528. 
^ Broderick, Avery; Loeb, Abraham; Narayan, Ramesh (August 2009). "The Event Horizon of Sagittarius A*". The Astrophysical Journal 701: 1357. arXiv:0903.1105. Bibcode:2009ApJ...701.1357B. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/701/2/1357. 
^ a b "NASA's NuSTAR Sees Rare Blurring of Black Hole Light". NASA. 12 August 2014. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Short-cut method of solution of geodesic equations for Schwarzchild black hole", J.A. Marck, Class.Quant. Grav. 13 (1996) 393-402.
^ a b c McClintock, J. E.; Remillard, R. A. (2006). "Black Hole Binaries". In Lewin, W.; van der Klis, M. Compact Stellar X-ray Sources. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0306213. ISBN 0-521-82659-4.  section 4.1.5.
^ a b c d e f g h i Celotti, A.; Miller, J. C.; Sciama, D. W. (1999). "Astrophysical evidence for the existence of black holes". Classical and Quantum Gravity 16 (12A): A3–A21. arXiv:astro-ph/9912186. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/16/12A/301. 
^ Winter, L. M.; Mushotzky, R. F.; Reynolds, C. S. (2006). "XMM‐Newton Archival Study of the Ultraluminous X‐Ray Population in Nearby Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal 649 (2): 730. arXiv:astro-ph/0512480. Bibcode:2006ApJ...649..730W. doi:10.1086/506579. 
^ information@eso.org. "Hubble directly observes the disc around a black hole". www.spacetelescope.org. Retrieved 2016-03-07. 
^ Muñoz, José A.; Mediavilla, Evencio; Kochanek, Christopher S.; Falco, Emilio; Mosquera, Ana María (2011-12-01). "A Study of Gravitational Lens Chromaticity with the Hubble Space Telescope". The Astrophysical Journal 742 (2): 67. arXiv:1107.5932. Bibcode:2011ApJ...742...67M. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/742/2/67. ISSN 0004-637X. 
^ Bolton, C. T. (1972). "Identification of Cygnus X-1 with HDE 226868". Nature 235 (5336): 271–273. Bibcode:1972Natur.235..271B. doi:10.1038/235271b0. 
^ Webster, B. L.; Murdin, P. (1972). "Cygnus X-1—a Spectroscopic Binary with a Heavy Companion ?". Nature 235 (5332): 37–38. Bibcode:1972Natur.235...37W. doi:10.1038/235037a0. 
^ Rolston, B. (10 November 1997). "The First Black Hole". The bulletin. University of Toronto. Archived from the original on 2008-05-02. Retrieved 2008-03-11. 
^ Shipman, H. L.; Yu, Z; Du, Y.W (1 January 1975). "The implausible history of triple star models for Cygnus X-1 Evidence for a black hole". Astrophysical Letters 16 (1): 9–12. Bibcode:1975ApL....16....9S. doi:10.1016/S0304-8853(99)00384-4. 
^ Narayan, R.; McClintock, J. (2008). "Advection-dominated accretion and the black hole event horizon". New Astronomy Reviews 51 (10–12): 733. arXiv:0803.0322. Bibcode:2008NewAR..51..733N. doi:10.1016/j.newar.2008.03.002. 
^ "NASA scientists identify smallest known black hole" (Press release). Goddard Space Flight Center. 2008-04-01. Retrieved 2009-03-14. 
^ Krolik, J. H. (1999). Active Galactic Nuclei. Princeton University Press. Ch. 1.2. ISBN 0-691-01151-6. 
^ Sparke, L. S.; Gallagher, J. S. (2000). Galaxies in the Universe: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press. Ch. 9.1. ISBN 0-521-59740-4. 
^ Chou, Felicia; Anderson, Janet; Watzke, Megan (5 January 2015). "RELEASE 15-001 - NASA’s Chandra Detects Record-Breaking Outburst from Milky Way’s Black Hole". NASA. Retrieved 6 January 2015. 
^ Kormendy, J.; Richstone, D. (1995). "Inward Bound—The Search For Supermassive Black Holes In Galactic Nuclei". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 33 (1): 581–624. Bibcode:1995ARA&A..33..581K. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.33.090195.003053. 
^ King, A. (2003). "Black Holes, Galaxy Formation, and the MBH-σ Relation". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 596 (1): 27–29. arXiv:astro-ph/0308342. Bibcode:2003ApJ...596L..27K. doi:10.1086/379143. 
^ Ferrarese, L.; Merritt, D. (2000). "A Fundamental Relation Between Supermassive Black Holes and their Host Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 539 (1): 9–12. arXiv:astro-ph/0006053. Bibcode:2000ApJ...539L...9F. doi:10.1086/312838. 
^ "A Black Hole's Dinner is Fast Approaching". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 6 February 2012. 
^ a b Bozza, V. (2010). "Gravitational Lensing by Black Holes". General Relativity and Gravitation 42 (42): 2269–2300. arXiv:0911.2187. Bibcode:2010GReGr..42.2269B. doi:10.1007/s10714-010-0988-2. 
^ Kovacs, Z.; Cheng, K. S.; Harko, T. (2009). "Can stellar mass black holes be quark stars?". Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 400 (3): 1632–1642. arXiv:0908.2672. Bibcode:2009MNRAS.400.1632K. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15571.x. 
^ Kusenko, A. (2006). "Properties and signatures of supersymmetric Q-balls". arXiv:hep-ph/0612159. 
^ Hansson, J.; Sandin, F. (2005). "Preon stars: a new class of cosmic compact objects". Physics Letters B 616 (1–2): 1. arXiv:astro-ph/0410417. Bibcode:2005PhLB..616....1H. doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2005.04.034. 
^ Kiefer, C. (2006). "Quantum gravity: general introduction and recent developments". Annalen der Physik 15 (1–2): 129. arXiv:gr-qc/0508120. Bibcode:2006AnP...518..129K. doi:10.1002/andp.200510175. 
^ "[NKS, Mathur states, 't Hooft-Polyakov monopoles, and Ward-Takahashi identities] - A New Kind of Science: The NKS Forum". wolframscience.com. Retrieved 12 April 2015. 
^ Skenderis, K.; Taylor, M. (2008). "The fuzzball proposal for black holes". Physics Reports 467 (4–5): 117. arXiv:0804.0552. Bibcode:2008PhR...467..117S. doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2008.08.001. 
^ Hawking, S. W. (1971). "Gravitational Radiation from Colliding Black Holes". Physical Review Letters 26 (21): 1344–1346. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26.1344H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.1344. 
^ a b Wald, R. M. (2001). "The Thermodynamics of Black Holes". Living Reviews in Relativity 4: 6. arXiv:gr-qc/9912119. Bibcode:2001LRR.....4....6W. doi:10.12942/lrr-2001-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10. 
^ 't Hooft, G. (2001). "The Holographic Principle". In Zichichi, A. Basics and highlights in fundamental physics. Subnuclear series 37. World Scientific. arXiv:hep-th/0003004. ISBN 978-981-02-4536-8. 
^ Strominger, A.; Vafa, C. (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379 (1–4): 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0. 
^ Carlip, S. (2009). "Black Hole Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 89. arXiv:0807.4520. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6_3. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0. 
^ Hawking, S. W. "Does God Play Dice?". www.hawking.org.uk. Retrieved 2009-03-14. 
^ Giddings, S. B. (1995). "The black hole information paradox". Particles, Strings and Cosmology. Johns Hopkins Workshop on Current Problems in Particle Theory 19 and the PASCOS Interdisciplinary Symposium 5. arXiv:hep-th/9508151. 
^ Mathur, S. D. (2011). The information paradox: conflicts and resolutions. XXV International Symposium on Lepton Photon Interactions at High Energies. arXiv:1201.2079. 


Further reading

Popular reading


Ferguson, Kitty (1991). Black Holes in Space-Time. Watts Franklin. ISBN 0-531-12524-6. 
Hawking, Stephen (1988). A Brief History of Time. Bantam Books, Inc. ISBN 0-553-38016-8. 
Hawking, Stephen; Penrose, Roger (1996). The Nature of Space and Time. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-03791-4. 
Melia, Fulvio (2003). The Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy. Princeton U Press. ISBN 978-0-691-09505-9. 
Melia, Fulvio (2003). The Edge of Infinity. Supermassive Black Holes in the Universe. Cambridge U Press. ISBN 978-0-521-81405-8. 
Pickover, Clifford (1998). Black Holes: A Traveler's Guide. Wiley, John & Sons, Inc. ISBN 0-471-19704-1. 
Thorne, Kip S. (1994). Black Holes and Time Warps. Norton, W. W. & Company, Inc. ISBN 0-393-31276-3. 
Wheeler, J. Craig (2007). Cosmic Catastrophes (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-85714-7. 


University textbooks and monographs


Carroll, Sean M. (2004). Spacetime and Geometry. Addison Wesley. ISBN 0-8053-8732-3. , the lecture notes on which the book was based are available for free from Sean Carroll's website.
Carter, B. (1973). "Black hole equilibrium states". In DeWitt, B. S.; DeWitt, C. Black Holes. 
Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan (1999). Mathematical Theory of Black Holes. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-850370-9. 
Frolov, V. P.; Novikov, I. D. (1998). "Black hole physics". 
Frolov, Valeri P.; Zelnikov, Andrei (2011). Introduction to Black Hole Physics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-969229-3. Zbl 1234.83001. 
Hawking, S. W.; Ellis, G. F. R. (1973). Large Scale Structure of space time. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-09906-4. 
Melia, Fulvio (2007). The Galactic Supermassive Black Hole. Princeton U Press. ISBN 978-0-691-13129-0. 
Misner, Charles; Thorne, Kip S.; Wheeler, John (1973). Gravitation. W. H. Freeman and Company. ISBN 0-7167-0344-0. 
Taylor, Edwin F.; Wheeler, John Archibald (2000). Exploring Black Holes. Addison Wesley Longman. ISBN 0-201-38423-X. 
Wald, Robert M. (1984). General Relativity. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-87033-5. 
Wald, Robert M. (1992). Space, Time, and Gravity: The Theory of the Big Bang and Black Holes. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-87029-4. 
Black holes Teviet Creighton, Richard H. Price Scholarpedia 3(1):4277. doi:10.4249/scholarpedia.4277


Review papers


Gallo, Elena; Marolf, Donald (2009). "Resource Letter BH-2: Black Holes". American Journal of Physics 77 (4): 294. arXiv:0806.2316. Bibcode:2009AmJPh..77..294G. doi:10.1119/1.3056569. 
Hughes, Scott A. (2005). "Trust but verify: The case for astrophysical black holes". arXiv:hep-ph/0511217.  Lecture notes from 2005 SLAC Summer Institute.

External links



Find more about
Black hole
at Wikipedia's sister projects




Media from Commons



News stories from Wikinews



Quotations from Wikiquote



Source texts from Wikisource



Textbooks from Wikibooks



Learning resources from Wikiversity




Black Holes on In Our Time at the BBC. (listen now)
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Singularities and Black Holes" by Erik Curiel and Peter Bokulich.
Black Holes: Gravity's Relentless Pull—Interactive multimedia Web site about the physics and astronomy of black holes from the Space Telescope Science Institute
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on Black Holes
"Schwarzschild Geometry"
Advanced Mathematics of Black Hole Evaporation
Hubble site


Videos


16-year-long study tracks stars orbiting Milky Way black hole
Movie of Black Hole Candidate from Max Planck Institute
Nature.com 2015-04-20 3D simulations of colliding black holes
Computer visualisation of the signal detected by LIGO
Two Black Holes Merge into One (based upon the signal GW150914









v
t
e


Black holes






Types



Schwarzschild
Rotating
Charged
Virtual
Binary











Size



Micro
Extremal

Electron


Stellar
Intermediate-mass
Supermassive
Quasar

Active galactic nucleus
Blazar
Large quasar group










Formation



Stellar evolution
Gravitational collapse
Neutron star

Related links


Compact star

Quark
Exotic


Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit
White dwarf

Related links


Supernova

Related links


Hypernova
Gamma-ray burst








Properties



Thermodynamics
Schwarzschild radius
M–sigma relation
Event horizon
Quasi-periodic oscillation
Photon sphere
Ergosphere
Hawking radiation
Penrose process
Blandford–Znajek process
Bondi accretion
Spaghettification
Gravitational lens








Models



Gravitational singularity

Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems


Primordial black hole
Gravastar
Dark star
Dark-energy star
Black star
Eternally collapsing object

Magnetospheric eternally collapsing object


Fuzzball
White hole
Naked singularity
Ring singularity
Immirzi parameter
Membrane paradigm
Kugelblitz
Wormhole
Quasi-star








Issues



No-hair theorem
Information paradox
Cosmic censorship
Alternative models
Holographic principle
Black hole complementarity
firewall (physics)
ER=EPR








Metrics



Schwarzschild
Kerr
Reissner–Nordström
Kerr–Newman








Lists



Black holes
Most massive
Quasars








Related



Timeline of black hole physics
Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer
Hypercompact stellar system
Black hole starship
















v
t
e


Relativity






Special
relativity





Background




Principle of relativity
Introduction to special relativity
Special relativity









Foundations




Frame of reference
Speed of light
Rapidity
Maxwell's equations









Formulation




Galilean relativity
Galilean transformation
Lorentz transformation









Consequences




Time dilation
Relativistic mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Length contraction
Relativity of simultaneity
Relativistic Doppler effect
Thomas precession
Relativistic disks









Spacetime




Light cone
World line
Spacetime diagram
Biquaternions
Minkowski space














General
relativity





Background




Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Resources









Fundamental
concepts




Special relativity
Equivalence principle
World line
Riemannian geometry
Minkowski diagram









Phenomena




Black hole
Event horizon
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Lenses
Singularity
Waves
Ladder paradox
Twin paradox
Two-body problem









Equations




ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
Einstein field equations
Geodesic equation
Friedmann equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation









Advanced
theories




Brans–Dicke theory
Kaluza–Klein
Mach's principle
Quantum gravity









Solutions




Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Taub–NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust











Scientists



Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedmann
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Taylor
Hulse
Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
Weiss
Bondi
Misner
others
















v
t
e


String theory






Background



Strings
History of string theory

First superstring revolution
Second superstring revolution


String theory landscape











Theory



Nambu–Goto action
Polyakov action
Bosonic string theory
Superstring theory

Type I string
Type II string

Type IIA string theory
Type IIB string theory


Heterotic string


N=2 superstring
F-theory
String field theory
Matrix string theory
Nonlinear sigma model
Tachyon condensation
RNS formalism








Concepts





String duality




T-duality
S-duality
U-duality
Montonen–Olive duality
Mysterious duality









Particles and fields




Graviton
Dilaton
Tachyon
Ramond–Ramond field
Kalb–Ramond field
Magnetic monopole









Branes




D-brane
S-brane
Black brane
Black holes
Black string
Brane cosmology
Quiver diagram
Hanany–Witten transition











Conformal
field theory



Virasoro algebra
Mirror symmetry
Conformal anomaly
Conformal algebra
Superconformal algebra
Vertex operator algebra
Loop algebra
Kac–Moody algebra
Wess–Zumino–Witten model








Gauge theory



Anomalies
Instantons
Chern–Simons form
Bogomol'nyi–Prasad–Sommerfield bound
Exceptional Lie groups (G2, F4, E6, E7, E8)
ADE classification
Dirac string
P-form electrodynamics








Geometry



Kaluza–Klein theory
Compactification
Why 10 dimensions?
Kähler manifold
Ricci-flat manifold

Calabi–Yau manifold
Hyperkähler manifold

K3 surface


G2 manifold
Spin(7) manifold


Generalized complex manifold
Orbifold
Conifold
Orientifold
Moduli space
Hořava–Witten domain wall
K-theory (physics)
Twisted K-theory








Supersymmetry



Supergravity
Superspace
Lie superalgebra
Lie supergroup








Holography



Holographic principle
AdS/CFT correspondence








M-theory



Matrix theory
Introduction to M-theory








String theorists



Nima Arkani-Hamed
Michael Francis Atiyah
Tom Banks
David Berenstein
Gerald Cleaver
Robbert Dijkgraaf
Jacques Distler
Michael Douglas
Michael Duff
Sergio Ferrara
Willy Fischler
Daniel Friedan
Rajesh Gopakumar
Michael Green
Brian Greene
David Gross
Steven Gubser
Sergei Gukov
Jeffrey Harvey
Petr Hořava
Gary Gibbons
Michio Kaku
Renata Kallosh
Theodor Kaluza
Anton Kapustin
Igor Klebanov
Oskar Klein
Hong Liu
Juan Maldacena
Donald Marolf
Emil Martinecm
Shiraz Minwalla
Gregory Moore
Lubos Motl
Sunil Mukhi
Robert Myers
Asad Naqvi
K. S. Narain
Horatiu Nastase
Nikita Nekrasov
André Neveu
Dimitri Nanopoulos
Holger Bech Nielsen
Peter van Nieuwenhuizen
Hirosi Ooguri
Joseph Polchinski
Alexander Polyakov
Arvind Rajaraman
Lisa Randall
Seifallah Randjbar-Daemi
Martin Rocek
John H. Schwarz
Nathan Seiberg
Ashoke Sen
Steve Shenker
Warren Siegel
Eva Silverstein
Matthias Staudacher
Andrew Strominger
Leonard Susskind
Paul Townsend
Sandip Trivedi
Cumrun Vafa
Gabriele Veneziano
Erik Verlinde
Herman Verlinde
Edward Witten
Tamiaki Yoneya
Alexander Zamolodchikov
Alexei Zamolodchikov
Barton Zwiebach













Authority control



GND: 4053793-6
BNF: cb11933630s (data)
NDL: 00561056











 
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Black_hole&oldid=716792743"					
Categories: Unsolved problems in physicsBlack holesGalaxiesTheory of relativityHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from February 2013Articles with inconsistent citation formatsCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2016Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2015Good articlesUse dmy dates from March 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersArticles containing video clips 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
navigationsearchFor other uses, see Black hole (disambiguation).




Simulation of gravitational lensing by a black hole, which distorts the image of a galaxy in the background




General relativity












Introduction
History



Mathematical formulation



Resources
Tests









Fundamental concepts


Equivalence principle
Special relativity
World line
Riemannian geometry








Phenomena





Kepler problem
Gravitational lensing
Gravitational waves
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Event horizon
Singularity
Black hole




Spacetime




Spacetime diagrams
Minkowski spacetime
Einstein–Rosen bridge














Equations
Formalisms






Equations




Linearized gravity
Einstein field equations
Friedmann
Geodesics
Mathisson–Papapetrou–Dixon
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein




Formalisms




ADM
BSSN
Post-Newtonian




Advanced theory




Kaluza–Klein theory
Quantum gravity











Solutions


Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Lemaître–Tolman
Taub-NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust








Scientists


Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedman
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Raychaudhuri
Taylor
Hulse
van Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
others









v
t
e





A black hole is a region of spacetime exhibiting such strong gravitational effects that nothing—including particles and electromagnetic radiation such as light—can escape from inside it.[1] The theory of general relativity predicts that a sufficiently compact mass can deform spacetime to form a black hole.[2][3] The boundary of the region from which no escape is possible is called the event horizon. Although crossing the event horizon has enormous effect on the fate of the object crossing it, it appears to have no locally detectable features. In many ways a black hole acts like an ideal black body, as it reflects no light.[4][5] Moreover, quantum field theory in curved spacetime predicts that event horizons emit Hawking radiation, with the same spectrum as a black body of a temperature inversely proportional to its mass. This temperature is on the order of billionths of a kelvin for black holes of stellar mass, making it essentially impossible to observe.
Objects whose gravitational fields are too strong for light to escape were first considered in the 18th century by John Michell and Pierre-Simon Laplace. The first modern solution of general relativity that would characterize a black hole was found by Karl Schwarzschild in 1916, although its interpretation as a region of space from which nothing can escape was first published by David Finkelstein in 1958. Black holes were long considered a mathematical curiosity; it was during the 1960s that theoretical work showed they were a generic prediction of general relativity. The discovery of neutron stars sparked interest in gravitationally collapsed compact objects as a possible astrophysical reality.
Black holes of stellar mass are expected to form when very massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycle. After a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing mass from its surroundings. By absorbing other stars and merging with other black holes, supermassive black holes of millions of solar masses (M☉) may form. There is general consensus that supermassive black holes exist in the centers of most galaxies.
Despite its invisible interior, the presence of a black hole can be inferred through its interaction with other matter and with electromagnetic radiation such as visible light. Matter that falls onto a black hole can form an external accretion disk heated by friction, forming some of the brightest objects in the universe. If there are other stars orbiting a black hole, their orbits can be used to determine the black hole's mass and location. Such observations can be used to exclude possible alternatives such as neutron stars. In this way, astronomers have identified numerous stellar black hole candidates in binary systems, and established that the radio source known as Sagittarius A*, at the core of our own Milky Way galaxy, contains a supermassive black hole of about 4.3 million solar masses.
On 11 February 2016, the LIGO collaboration announced the first observation of gravitational waves; because these waves were generated from a black hole merger it was the first ever direct detection of a binary black hole merger.[6]




Predicted appearance of non-rotating black hole with toroidal ring of ionised matter, such as has been proposed[7] as a model for Sagittarius A*. The asymmetry is due to the Doppler effect resulting from the enormous orbital speed needed for centrifugal balance of the very strong gravitational attraction of the hole.





Contents


1 History

1.1 General relativity
1.2 Golden age


2 Properties and structure

2.1 Physical properties
2.2 Event horizon
2.3 Singularity
2.4 Photon sphere
2.5 Ergosphere
2.6 Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)


3 Formation and evolution

3.1 Gravitational collapse

3.1.1 Primordial black holes in the Big Bang


3.2 High-energy collisions
3.3 Growth
3.4 Evaporation


4 Observational evidence

4.1 Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes
4.2 Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*
4.3 Accretion of matter
4.4 X-ray binaries

4.4.1 Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow
4.4.2 Quasi-periodic oscillations


4.5 Galactic nuclei
4.6 Microlensing (proposed)
4.7 Alternatives


5 Open questions

5.1 Entropy and thermodynamics
5.2 Information loss paradox


6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links



History




Simulated view of a black hole in front of the Large Magellanic Cloud. Note the gravitational lensing effect, which produces two enlarged but highly distorted views of the Cloud. Across the top, the Milky Way disk appears distorted into an arc.


The idea of a body so massive that even light could not escape was first put forward by John Michell in a letter written in 1783 to Henry Cavendish of the Royal Society:

If the semi-diameter of a sphere of the same density as the Sun were to exceed that of the Sun in the proportion of 500 to 1, a body falling from an infinite height towards it would have acquired at its surface greater velocity than that of light, and consequently supposing light to be attracted by the same force in proportion to its vis inertiae, with other bodies, all light emitted from such a body would be made to return towards it by its own proper gravity.
— John Michell[8]

In 1796, mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace promoted the same idea in the first and second editions of his book Exposition du système du Monde (it was removed from later editions).[9][10] Such "dark stars" were largely ignored in the nineteenth century, since it was not understood how a massless wave such as light could be influenced by gravity.[11]
General relativity
In 1915, Albert Einstein developed his theory of general relativity, having earlier shown that gravity does influence light's motion. Only a few months later, Karl Schwarzschild found a solution to the Einstein field equations, which describes the gravitational field of a point mass and a spherical mass.[12] A few months after Schwarzschild, Johannes Droste, a student of Hendrik Lorentz, independently gave the same solution for the point mass and wrote more extensively about its properties.[13][14] This solution had a peculiar behaviour at what is now called the Schwarzschild radius, where it became singular, meaning that some of the terms in the Einstein equations became infinite. The nature of this surface was not quite understood at the time. In 1924, Arthur Eddington showed that the singularity disappeared after a change of coordinates (see Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates), although it took until 1933 for Georges Lemaître to realize that this meant the singularity at the Schwarzschild radius was an unphysical coordinate singularity.[15] Arthur Eddington did however comment on the possibility of a star with mass compressed to the Schwarzschild radius in a 1926 book, noting that Einstein's theory allows us to rule out overly large densities for visible stars like Betelgeuse because "a star of 250 million km radius could not possibly have so high a density as the sun. Firstly, the force of gravitation would be so great that light would be unable to escape from it, the rays falling back to the star like a stone to the earth. Secondly, the red shift of the spectral lines would be so great that the spectrum would be shifted out of existence. Thirdly, the mass would produce so much curvature of the space-time metric that space would close up around the star, leaving us outside (i.e., nowhere)."[16][17]
In 1931, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar calculated, using special relativity, that a non-rotating body of electron-degenerate matter above a certain limiting mass (now called the Chandrasekhar limit at 1.4 M☉) has no stable solutions.[18] His arguments were opposed by many of his contemporaries like Eddington and Lev Landau, who argued that some yet unknown mechanism would stop the collapse.[19] They were partly correct: a white dwarf slightly more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit will collapse into a neutron star,[20] which is itself stable because of the Pauli exclusion principle. But in 1939, Robert Oppenheimer and others predicted that neutron stars above approximately 3 M☉ (the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit) would collapse into black holes for the reasons presented by Chandrasekhar, and concluded that no law of physics was likely to intervene and stop at least some stars from collapsing to black holes.[21]
Oppenheimer and his co-authors interpreted the singularity at the boundary of the Schwarzschild radius as indicating that this was the boundary of a bubble in which time stopped. This is a valid point of view for external observers, but not for infalling observers. Because of this property, the collapsed stars were called "frozen stars",[22] because an outside observer would see the surface of the star frozen in time at the instant where its collapse takes it inside the Schwarzschild radius.
Golden age
See also: History of general relativity
In 1958, David Finkelstein identified the Schwarzschild surface as an event horizon, "a perfect unidirectional membrane: causal influences can cross it in only one direction".[23] This did not strictly contradict Oppenheimer's results, but extended them to include the point of view of infalling observers. Finkelstein's solution extended the Schwarzschild solution for the future of observers falling into a black hole. A complete extension had already been found by Martin Kruskal, who was urged to publish it.[24]
These results came at the beginning of the golden age of general relativity, which was marked by general relativity and black holes becoming mainstream subjects of research. This process was helped by the discovery of pulsars in 1967,[25][26] which, by 1969, were shown to be rapidly rotating neutron stars.[27] Until that time, neutron stars, like black holes, were regarded as just theoretical curiosities; but the discovery of pulsars showed their physical relevance and spurred a further interest in all types of compact objects that might be formed by gravitational collapse.
In this period more general black hole solutions were found. In 1963, Roy Kerr found the exact solution for a rotating black hole. Two years later, Ezra Newman found the axisymmetric solution for a black hole that is both rotating and electrically charged.[28] Through the work of Werner Israel,[29] Brandon Carter,[30][31] and David Robinson[32] the no-hair theorem emerged, stating that a stationary black hole solution is completely described by the three parameters of the Kerr–Newman metric: mass, angular momentum, and electric charge.[33]
At first, it was suspected that the strange features of the black hole solutions were pathological artifacts from the symmetry conditions imposed, and that the singularities would not appear in generic situations. This view was held in particular by Vladimir Belinsky, Isaak Khalatnikov, and Evgeny Lifshitz, who tried to prove that no singularities appear in generic solutions. However, in the late 1960s Roger Penrose[34] and Stephen Hawking used global techniques to prove that singularities appear generically.[35]
Work by James Bardeen, Jacob Bekenstein, Carter, and Hawking in the early 1970s led to the formulation of black hole thermodynamics.[36] These laws describe the behaviour of a black hole in close analogy to the laws of thermodynamics by relating mass to energy, area to entropy, and surface gravity to temperature. The analogy was completed when Hawking, in 1974, showed that quantum field theory predicts that black holes should radiate like a black body with a temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole.[37]
The first use of the term "black hole" in print was by journalist Ann Ewing in her article "'Black Holes' in Space", dated 18 January 1964, which was a report on a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.[38] John Wheeler used the term "black hole" at a lecture in 1967, leading some to credit him with coining the phrase. After Wheeler's use of the term, it was quickly adopted in general use.
Properties and structure
The no-hair theorem states that, once it achieves a stable condition after formation, a black hole has only three independent physical properties: mass, charge, and angular momentum.[33] Any two black holes that share the same values for these properties, or parameters, are indistinguishable according to classical (i.e. non-quantum) mechanics.
These properties are special because they are visible from outside a black hole. For example, a charged black hole repels other like charges just like any other charged object. Similarly, the total mass inside a sphere containing a black hole can be found by using the gravitational analog of Gauss's law, the ADM mass, far away from the black hole.[clarification needed][39] Likewise, the angular momentum can be measured from far away using frame dragging by the gravitomagnetic field.[clarification needed]
When an object falls into a black hole, any information about the shape of the object or distribution of charge on it is evenly distributed along the horizon of the black hole, and is lost to outside observers. The behavior of the horizon in this situation is a dissipative system that is closely analogous to that of a conductive stretchy membrane with friction and electrical resistance—the membrane paradigm.[40] This is different from other field theories such as electromagnetism, which do not have any friction or resistivity at the microscopic level, because they are time-reversible. Because a black hole eventually achieves a stable state with only three parameters, there is no way to avoid losing information about the initial conditions: the gravitational and electric fields of a black hole give very little information about what went in. The information that is lost includes every quantity that cannot be measured far away from the black hole horizon, including approximately conserved quantum numbers such as the total baryon number and lepton number. This behavior is so puzzling that it has been called the black hole information loss paradox.[41][42]
Physical properties




A simple illustration of a non-spinning black hole


The simplest static black holes have mass but neither electric charge nor angular momentum. These black holes are often referred to as Schwarzschild black holes after Karl Schwarzschild who discovered this solution in 1916.[12] According to Birkhoff's theorem, it is the only vacuum solution that is spherically symmetric.[43] This means that there is no observable difference between the gravitational field of such a black hole and that of any other spherical object of the same mass. The popular notion of a black hole "sucking in everything" in its surroundings is therefore only correct near a black hole's horizon; far away, the external gravitational field is identical to that of any other body of the same mass.[44]
Solutions describing more general black holes also exist. Non-rotating charged black holes are described by the Reissner–Nordström metric, while the Kerr metric describes a non-charged rotating black hole. The most general stationary black hole solution known is the Kerr–Newman metric, which describes a black hole with both charge and angular momentum.[45]
While the mass of a black hole can take any positive value, the charge and angular momentum are constrained by the mass. In Planck units, the total electric charge Q and the total angular momentum J are expected to satisfy



for a black hole of mass M. Black holes satisfying this inequality are called extremal. Solutions of Einstein's equations that violate this inequality exist, but they do not possess an event horizon. These solutions have so-called naked singularities that can be observed from the outside, and hence are deemed unphysical. The cosmic censorship hypothesis rules out the formation of such singularities, when they are created through the gravitational collapse of realistic matter.[2] This is supported by numerical simulations.[46]
Due to the relatively large strength of the electromagnetic force, black holes forming from the collapse of stars are expected to retain the nearly neutral charge of the star. Rotation, however, is expected to be a common feature of compact objects. The black-hole candidate binary X-ray source GRS 1915+105[47] appears to have an angular momentum near the maximum allowed value.

Black hole classifications

Class
Mass
Size


Supermassive black hole
~105–1010 MSun
~0.001–400 AU


Intermediate-mass black hole
~103 MSun
~103 km ≈ REarth


Stellar black hole
~10 MSun
~30 km


Micro black hole
up to ~MMoon
up to ~0.1 mm


Black holes are commonly classified according to their mass, independent of angular momentum J or electric charge Q. The size of a black hole, as determined by the radius of the event horizon, or Schwarzschild radius, is roughly proportional to the mass M through



where rsh is the Schwarzschild radius and MSun is the mass of the Sun.[48] This relation is exact only for black holes with zero charge and angular momentum; for more general black holes it can differ up to a factor of 2.
Event horizon
Main article: Event horizon



Far away from the black hole, a particle can move in any direction, as illustrated by the set of arrows. It is only restricted by the speed of light.



Closer to the black hole, spacetime starts to deform. There are more paths going towards the black hole than paths moving away.[Note 1]



Inside of the event horizon, all paths bring the particle closer to the center of the black hole. It is no longer possible for the particle to escape.


The defining feature of a black hole is the appearance of an event horizon—a boundary in spacetime through which matter and light can only pass inward towards the mass of the black hole. Nothing, not even light, can escape from inside the event horizon. The event horizon is referred to as such because if an event occurs within the boundary, information from that event cannot reach an outside observer, making it impossible to determine if such an event occurred.[50]
As predicted by general relativity, the presence of a mass deforms spacetime in such a way that the paths taken by particles bend towards the mass.[51] At the event horizon of a black hole, this deformation becomes so strong that there are no paths that lead away from the black hole.
To a distant observer, clocks near a black hole appear to tick more slowly than those further away from the black hole.[52] Due to this effect, known as gravitational time dilation, an object falling into a black hole appears to slow as it approaches the event horizon, taking an infinite time to reach it.[53] At the same time, all processes on this object slow down, from the view point of a fixed outside observer, causing any light emitted by the object to appear redder and dimmer, an effect known as gravitational redshift.[54] Eventually, the falling object becomes so dim that it can no longer be seen.
On the other hand, indestructible observers falling into a black hole do not notice any of these effects as they cross the event horizon. According to their own clocks, which appear to them to tick normally, they cross the event horizon after a finite time without noting any singular behaviour; it is impossible to determine the location of the event horizon from local observations.[55]
The shape of the event horizon of a black hole is always approximately spherical.[Note 2][58] For non-rotating (static) black holes the geometry of the event horizon is precisely spherical, while for rotating black holes the sphere is oblate.
Singularity
Main article: Gravitational singularity
At the center of a black hole, as described by general relativity, lies a gravitational singularity, a region where the spacetime curvature becomes infinite.[59] For a non-rotating black hole, this region takes the shape of a single point and for a rotating black hole, it is smeared out to form a ring singularity that lies in the plane of rotation.[60] In both cases, the singular region has zero volume. It can also be shown that the singular region contains all the mass of the black hole solution.[61] The singular region can thus be thought of as having infinite density.
Observers falling into a Schwarzschild black hole (i.e., non-rotating and not charged) cannot avoid being carried into the singularity, once they cross the event horizon. They can prolong the experience by accelerating away to slow their descent, but only up to a limit; after attaining a certain ideal velocity, it is best to free fall the rest of the way.[62] When they reach the singularity, they are crushed to infinite density and their mass is added to the total of the black hole. Before that happens, they will have been torn apart by the growing tidal forces in a process sometimes referred to as spaghettification or the "noodle effect".[63]
In the case of a charged (Reissner–Nordström) or rotating (Kerr) black hole, it is possible to avoid the singularity. Extending these solutions as far as possible reveals the hypothetical possibility of exiting the black hole into a different spacetime with the black hole acting as a wormhole.[64] The possibility of traveling to another universe is however only theoretical, since any perturbation would destroy this possibility.[65] It also appears to be possible to follow closed timelike curves (returning to one's own past) around the Kerr singularity, which lead to problems with causality like the grandfather paradox.[66] It is expected that none of these peculiar effects would survive in a proper quantum treatment of rotating and charged black holes.[67]
The appearance of singularities in general relativity is commonly perceived as signaling the breakdown of the theory.[68] This breakdown, however, is expected; it occurs in a situation where quantum effects should describe these actions, due to the extremely high density and therefore particle interactions. To date, it has not been possible to combine quantum and gravitational effects into a single theory, although there exist attempts to formulate such a theory of quantum gravity. It is generally expected that such a theory will not feature any singularities.[69][70]
Photon sphere
Main article: Photon sphere
The photon sphere is a spherical boundary of zero thickness in which photons that move on tangents to that sphere would be trapped in a circular orbit about the black hole. For non-rotating black holes, the photon sphere has a radius 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius. Their orbits would be dynamically unstable, hence any small perturbation, such as a particle of infalling matter, would cause an instability that would grow over time, either setting the photon on an outward trajectory causing it to escape the black hole, or on an inward spiral where it would eventually cross the event horizon.[71]
While light can still escape from the photon sphere, any light that crosses the photon sphere on an inbound trajectory will be captured by the black hole. Hence any light that reaches an outside observer from the photon sphere must have been emitted by objects between the photon sphere and the event horizon.[71]
Other compact objects, such as neutron stars, can also have photon spheres.[72] This follows from the fact that the gravitational field external to a spherically-symmetric object is governed by the Schwarzschild metric, which depends only on the object's mass rather than the radius of the object, hence any object whose radius shrinks to smaller than 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius will have a photon sphere.
Ergosphere
Main article: Ergosphere




The ergosphere is an oblate spheroid region outside of the event horizon, where objects cannot remain stationary.


Rotating black holes are surrounded by a region of spacetime in which it is impossible to stand still, called the ergosphere. This is the result of a process known as frame-dragging; general relativity predicts that any rotating mass will tend to slightly "drag" along the spacetime immediately surrounding it. Any object near the rotating mass will tend to start moving in the direction of rotation. For a rotating black hole, this effect is so strong near the event horizon that an object would have to move faster than the speed of light in the opposite direction to just stand still.[73]
The ergosphere of a black hole is a volume whose inner boundary is the black hole's event horizon and an outer boundary of an oblate spheroid, which coincides with the event horizon at the poles but noticeably wider around the equator. The outer boundary is sometimes called the ergosurface.
Objects and radiation can escape normally from the ergosphere. Through the Penrose process, objects can emerge from the ergosphere with more energy than they entered. This energy is taken from the rotational energy of the black hole causing the latter to slow.[74]
Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)
Main article: Innermost stable circular orbit
In Newtonian gravity, test particles can stably orbit at arbitrary distances from a central object. In general relativity, however, there exists an innermost stable circular orbit (often called the ISCO), inside of which, any infinitesimal perturbations to a circular orbit will lead to inspiral into the black hole.[75] The location of the ISCO depends on the spin of the black hole, in the case of a Schwarzschild black hole (spin zero) is:



and decreases with increasing spin.
Formation and evolution
Considering the exotic nature of black holes, it may be natural[clarification needed] to question if such bizarre objects could exist in nature or to suggest that they are merely pathological solutions to Einstein's equations. Einstein himself wrongly thought that black holes would not form, because he held that the angular momentum of collapsing particles would stabilize their motion at some radius.[76] This led the general relativity community to dismiss all results to the contrary for many years. However, a minority of relativists continued to contend that black holes were physical objects,[77] and by the end of the 1960s, they had persuaded the majority of researchers in the field that there is no obstacle to the formation of an event horizon.
Once an event horizon forms, Penrose proved, a singularity will form within.[34] Shortly afterwards, Hawking showed that many cosmological solutions that describe the Big Bang have singularities without scalar fields or other exotic matter (see "Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems").[clarification needed] The Kerr solution, the no-hair theorem, and the laws of black hole thermodynamics showed that the physical properties of black holes were simple and comprehensible, making them respectable subjects for research.[78] The primary formation process for black holes is expected to be the gravitational collapse of heavy objects such as stars, but there are also more exotic processes that can lead to the production of black holes.
Gravitational collapse
Main article: Gravitational collapse
Gravitational collapse occurs when an object's internal pressure is insufficient to resist the object's own gravity. For stars this usually occurs either because a star has too little "fuel" left to maintain its temperature through stellar nucleosynthesis, or because a star that would have been stable receives extra matter in a way that does not raise its core temperature. In either case the star's temperature is no longer high enough to prevent it from collapsing under its own weight.[79] The collapse may be stopped by the degeneracy pressure of the star's constituents, allowing the condensation of matter into an exotic denser state. The result is one of the various types of compact star. The type of compact star formed depends on the mass of the remnant of the original star left after the outer layers have been blown away. Such explosions, from a supernova explosion or by pulsations, leads to planetary nebula. Note that this mass can be substantially less than the original star. Remnants exceeding 5 M☉ are produced by stars that were over 20 M☉ before the collapse.[79]
If the mass of the remnant exceeds about 3–4 M☉ (the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit[21]), either because the original star was very heavy or because the remnant collected additional mass through accretion of matter, even the degeneracy pressure of neutrons is insufficient to stop the collapse. No known mechanism (except possibly quark degeneracy pressure, see quark star) is powerful enough to stop the implosion and the object will inevitably collapse to form a black hole.[79]
The gravitational collapse of heavy stars is assumed to be responsible for the formation of stellar mass black holes. Star formation in the early universe may have resulted in very massive stars, which upon their collapse would have produced black holes of up to 103 M☉. These black holes could be the seeds of the supermassive black holes found in the centers of most galaxies.[80]
While most of the energy released during gravitational collapse is emitted very quickly, an outside observer does not actually see the end of this process. Even though the collapse takes a finite amount of time from the reference frame of infalling matter, a distant observer would see the infalling material slow and halt just above the event horizon, due to gravitational time dilation. Light from the collapsing material takes longer and longer to reach the observer, with the light emitted just before the event horizon forms delayed an infinite amount of time. Thus the external observer never sees the formation of the event horizon; instead, the collapsing material seems to become dimmer and increasingly red-shifted, eventually fading away.[81]
Primordial black holes in the Big Bang
Gravitational collapse requires great density. In the current epoch of the universe these high densities are only found in stars, but in the early universe shortly after the big bang densities were much greater, possibly allowing for the creation of black holes. The high density alone is not enough to allow the formation of black holes since a uniform mass distribution will not allow the mass to bunch up. In order for primordial black holes to form in such a dense medium, there must be initial density perturbations that can then grow under their own gravity. Different models for the early universe vary widely in their predictions of the size of these perturbations. Various models predict the creation of black holes, ranging from a Planck mass to hundreds of thousands of solar masses.[82] Primordial black holes could thus account for the creation of any type of black hole.[clarification needed]
High-energy collisions




A simulated event in the CMS detector, a collision in which a micro black hole may be created.


Gravitational collapse is not the only process that could create black holes. In principle, black holes could be formed in high-energy collisions that achieve sufficient density. As of 2002, no such events have been detected, either directly or indirectly as a deficiency of the mass balance in particle accelerator experiments.[83] This suggests that there must be a lower limit for the mass of black holes. Theoretically, this boundary is expected to lie around the Planck mass (mP = √ħc/G ≈ 7019120000000000000♠1.2×1019 GeV/c2 ≈ 6992220000000000000♠2.2×10−8 kg), where quantum effects are expected to invalidate the predictions of general relativity.[84] This would put the creation of black holes firmly out of reach of any high-energy process occurring on or near the Earth. However, certain developments in quantum gravity suggest that the Planck mass could be much lower: some braneworld scenarios for example put the boundary as low as 7000100000000000000♠1 TeV/c2.[85] This would make it conceivable for micro black holes to be created in the high-energy collisions that occur when cosmic rays hit the Earth's atmosphere, or possibly in the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. These theories are very speculative, and the creation of black holes in these processes is deemed unlikely by many specialists.[86] Even if micro black holes could be formed, it is expected that they would evaporate in about 10−25 seconds, posing no threat to the Earth.[87]
Growth
Once a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing additional matter. Any black hole will continually absorb gas and interstellar dust from its surroundings and omnipresent cosmic background radiation. This is the primary process through which supermassive black holes seem to have grown.[80] A similar process has been suggested for the formation of intermediate-mass black holes found in globular clusters.[88]
Another possibility for black hole growth, is for a black hole to merge with other objects such as stars or even other black holes. Although not necessary for growth, this is thought to have been important, especially for the early development of supermassive black holes, which could have formed from the coagulation of many smaller objects.[80] The process has also been proposed as the origin of some intermediate-mass black holes.[89][90]
Evaporation
Main article: Hawking radiation
In 1974, Hawking predicted that black holes are not entirely black but emit small amounts of thermal radiation;[37] this effect has become known as Hawking radiation. By applying quantum field theory to a static black hole background, he determined that a black hole should emit particles that display a perfect black body spectrum. Since Hawking's publication, many others have verified the result through various approaches.[91] If Hawking's theory of black hole radiation is correct, then black holes are expected to shrink and evaporate over time as they lose mass by the emission of photons and other particles.[37] The temperature of this thermal spectrum (Hawking temperature) is proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, which, for a Schwarzschild black hole, is inversely proportional to the mass. Hence, large black holes emit less radiation than small black holes.[92]
A stellar black hole of 1 M☉ has a Hawking temperature of about 100 nanokelvins. This is far less than the 2.7 K temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation. Stellar-mass or larger black holes receive more mass from the cosmic microwave background than they emit through Hawking radiation and thus will grow instead of shrink.[citation needed] To have a Hawking temperature larger than 2.7 K (and be able to evaporate), a black hole would need a mass less than the Moon. Such a black hole would have a diameter of less than a tenth of a millimeter.[93]
If a black hole is very small, the radiation effects are expected to become very strong. Even a black hole that is heavy compared to a human would evaporate in an instant. A black hole with the mass of a car would have a diameter of about 10−24 m and take a nanosecond to evaporate, during which time it would briefly have a luminosity of more than 200 times that of the Sun. Lower-mass black holes are expected to evaporate even faster; for example, a black hole of mass 1 TeV/c2 would take less than 10−88 seconds to evaporate completely. For such a small black hole, quantum gravitation effects are expected to play an important role and could hypothetically make such a small black hole stable, although current developments in quantum gravity do not indicate so.[94][95]
The Hawking radiation for an astrophysical black hole is predicted to be very weak and would thus be exceedingly difficult to detect from Earth. A possible exception, however, is the burst of gamma rays emitted in the last stage of the evaporation of primordial black holes. Searches for such flashes have proven unsuccessful and provide stringent limits on the possibility of existence of low mass primordial black holes.[96] NASA's Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope launched in 2008 will continue the search for these flashes.[97]
Observational evidence




Gas cloud ripped apart by black hole at the centre of the Milky Way.[98]


By their very nature, black holes do not directly emit any electromagnetic radiation other than the hypothetical Hawking radiation, so astrophysicists searching for black holes must generally rely on indirect observations. For example, a black hole's existence can sometimes be inferred by observing its gravitational interactions with its surroundings. However, the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT), run by MIT's Haystack Observatory, is an attempt to directly observe the immediate environment of the event horizon of Sagittarius A*, the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way. The first image of the event horizon may appear as early as 2016.[99] The existence of magnetic fields just outside the event horizon of Sagittarius A*, which were predicted by theoretical studies of black holes, was confirmed by the EHT in 2015.[100][101]
Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes
On 24 September 2015 the LIGO gravitational wave observatory made the first-ever successful observation of gravitational waves.[6][102] The signal was consistent with theoretical predictions for the gravitational waves produced by the merger of two black holes: one with about 36 solar masses, and the other around 29 solar masses.[6][103] This observation provides the most concrete evidence for the existence of black holes to date. For instance, the gravitational wave signal suggests that the separation of the two object prior to merger was just 350 km (or roughly 4 times the Schwarzschild radius corresponding to the inferred masses). The objects must therefore have been extremely compact, leaving black holes as the most plausible interpretation.[6]
More importantly, the signal observed by LIGO also included the start of the post-merger ringdown, the signal produced as the newly formed compact object settles down to a stationary state. Arguably, the ringdown is the most direct way of observing a black hole.[104] From the LIGO signal it is possible to extract the frequency and damping time of the dominant mode of the ringdown. From these it is possible to infer the mass and angular momentum of the final object, which match independent predictions from numerical simulations of the merger.[105] The frequency and decay time of the dominant mode are determined by the geometry of the photon sphere. Hence, observation of this mode confirms the presence of a photon sphere, however it cannot exclude possible exotic alternatives to black holes that are compact enough to have a photon sphere.[104]
The observation also provides the first observational evidence for the existence of stellar-mass black hole binaries. Furthermore, it is the first observational evidence of stellar-mass black holes weighing 25 solar masses or more.[106]
Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*
The proper motions of stars near the center of our own Milky Way provide strong observational evidence that these stars are orbiting a supermassive black hole.[107] Since 1995, astronomers have tracked the motions of 90 stars orbiting an invisible object coincident with the radio source Sagittarius A*. By fitting their motions to Keplerian orbits, the astronomers were able to infer, in 1998, that a 2.6 million M☉ object must be contained in a volume with a radius of 0.02 light-years to cause the motions of those stars.[108] Since then, one of the stars—called S2—has completed a full orbit. From the orbital data, astronomers were able to make refine the calculations of the mass to 4.3 million M☉ and a radius of less than 0.002 lightyears for the object causing the orbital motion of those stars.[107] The upper limit on the object's size is still too large to test whether it is smaller than its Schwarzschild radius; nevertheless, these observations strongly suggest that the central object is a supermassive black hole as there are no other plausible scenarios for confining so much invisible mass into such a small volume.[108] Additionally, there is some observational evidence that this object might possess an event horizon, a feature unique to black holes.[109]
Accretion of matter
See also: Accretion disc




Black hole with corona, X-ray source (artist's concept).[110]


Due to conservation of angular momentum, gas falling into the gravitational well created by a massive object will typically form a disc-like structure around the object. Artists' impressions such as the accompanying representation of a black hole with corona commonly depict the black hole as if it were a flat-space material body hiding the part of the disc just behind it, but detailed mathematical modelling[111] shows that the image of the disc would actually be distorted by the bending of light that originated behind the black hole in such a way that the upper side of the disc would be entirely visible, while there would be a partially visible secondary image of the underside of the disk.




Predicted view from outside the horizon of a Schwarzschild black hole lit by a thin accretion disc


Within such a disc, friction would cause angular momentum to be transported outward, allowing matter to fall further inward, thus releasing potential energy and increasing the temperature of the gas.[112]




Blurring of X-rays near Black hole (NuSTAR; 12 August 2014).[110]


When the accreting object is a neutron star or a black hole, the gas in the inner accretion disc orbits at very high speeds because of its proximity to the compact object. The resulting friction is so significant that it heats the inner disc to temperatures at which it emits vast amounts of electromagnetic radiation (mainly X-rays). These bright X-ray sources may be detected by telescopes. This process of accretion is one of the most efficient energy-producing processes known; up to 40% of the rest mass of the accreted material can be emitted as radiation.[112] (In nuclear fusion only about 0.7% of the rest mass will be emitted as energy.) In many cases, accretion discs are accompanied by relativistic jets that are emitted along the poles, which carry away much of the energy. The mechanism for the creation of these jets is currently not well understood.
As such, many of the universe's more energetic phenomena have been attributed to the accretion of matter on black holes. In particular, active galactic nuclei and quasars are believed to be the accretion discs of supermassive black holes.[113] Similarly, X-ray binaries are generally accepted to be binary star systems in which one of the two stars is a compact object accreting matter from its companion.[113] It has also been suggested that some ultraluminous X-ray sources may be the accretion disks of intermediate-mass black holes.[114]
In November 2011 the first direct observation of a quasar accretion disk around a supermassive black hole was reported.[115][116]
X-ray binaries
See also: X-ray binary


Play media


A computer simulation of a star being consumed by a black hole. The blue dot indicates the location of the black hole.






A Chandra X-Ray Observatory image of Cygnus X-1, which was the first strong black hole candidate discovered


X-ray binaries are binary star systems that emit a majority of their radiation in the X-ray part of the spectrum. These X-ray emissions are generally thought to result when one of the stars (compact object) accretes matter from another (regular) star. The presence of an ordinary star in such a system provides a unique opportunity for studying the central object and to determine if it might be a black hole.


Play media


This animation compares the X-ray 'heartbeats' of GRS 1915 and IGR J17091, two black holes that ingest gas from companion stars.


If such a system emits signals that can be directly traced back to the compact object, it cannot be a black hole. The absence of such a signal does, however, not exclude the possibility that the compact object is a neutron star. By studying the companion star it is often possible to obtain the orbital parameters of the system and to obtain an estimate for the mass of the compact object. If this is much larger than the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit (that is, the maximum mass a neutron star can have before it collapses) then the object cannot be a neutron star and is generally expected to be a black hole.[113]
The first strong candidate for a black hole, Cygnus X-1, was discovered in this way by Charles Thomas Bolton,[117] Louise Webster and Paul Murdin[118] in 1972.[119][120] Some doubt, however, remained due to the uncertainties that result from the companion star being much heavier than the candidate black hole.[113] Currently, better candidates for black holes are found in a class of X-ray binaries called soft X-ray transients.[113] In this class of system, the companion star is of relatively low mass allowing for more accurate estimates of the black hole mass. Moreover, these systems are actively emit X-rays for only several months once every 10–50 years. During the period of low X-ray emission (called quiescence), the accretion disc is extremely faint allowing detailed observation of the companion star during this period. One of the best such candidates is V404 Cyg.
Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow
The faintness of the accretion disc of an X-ray binary during quiescence is suspected to be caused by the flow of mass entering a mode called an advection-dominated accretion flow (ADAF). In this mode, almost all the energy generated by friction in the disc is swept along with the flow instead of radiated away. If this model is correct, then it forms strong qualitative evidence for the presence of an event horizon,[121] since if the object at the center of the disc had a solid surface, it would emit large amounts of radiation as the highly energetic gas hits the surface,[clarification needed] an effect that is observed for neutron stars in a similar state.[112]
Quasi-periodic oscillations
Main article: Quasi-periodic oscillations
The X-ray emissions from accretion disks sometimes flicker at certain frequencies. These signals are called quasi-periodic oscillations and are thought to be caused by material moving along the inner edge of the accretion disk (the innermost stable circular orbit). As such their frequency is linked to the mass of the compact object. They can thus be used as an alternative way to determine the mass of candidate black holes.[122]
Galactic nuclei
See also: Active galactic nucleus




Magnetic waves, called Alfvén S-waves, flow from the base of black hole jets.



Astronomers use the term "active galaxy" to describe galaxies with unusual characteristics, such as unusual spectral line emission and very strong radio emission. Theoretical and observational studies have shown that the activity in these active galactic nuclei (AGN) may be explained by the presence of supermassive black holes, which can be millions of times more massive than stellar ones. The models of these AGN consist of a central black hole that may be millions or billions of times more massive than the Sun; a disk of gas and dust called an accretion disk; and two jets perpendicular to the accretion disk.[123][124]




Detection of unusually bright X-Ray flare from Sagittarius A*, a black hole in the center of the Milky Way galaxy on 5 January 2015.[125]


Although supermassive black holes are expected to be found in most AGN, only some galaxies' nuclei have been more carefully studied in attempts to both identify and measure the actual masses of the central supermassive black hole candidates. Some of the most notable galaxies with supermassive black hole candidates include the Andromeda Galaxy, M32, M87, NGC 3115, NGC 3377, NGC 4258, NGC 4889, NGC 1277, OJ 287, APM 08279+5255 and the Sombrero Galaxy.[126]
It is now widely accepted that the center of nearly every galaxy, not just active ones, contains a supermassive black hole.[127] The close observational correlation between the mass of this hole and the velocity dispersion of the host galaxy's bulge, known as the M-sigma relation, strongly suggests a connection between the formation of the black hole and the galaxy itself.[128]




Simulation of gas cloud after close approach to the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way.[129]


Microlensing (proposed)
Another way that the black hole nature of an object may be tested in the future is through observation of effects caused by a strong gravitational field in their vicinity. One such effect is gravitational lensing: The deformation of spacetime around a massive object causes light rays to be deflected much as light passing through an optic lens. Observations have been made of weak gravitational lensing, in which light rays are deflected by only a few arcseconds. However, it has never been directly observed for a black hole.[130] One possibility for observing gravitational lensing by a black hole would be to observe stars in orbit around the black hole. There are several candidates for such an observation in orbit around Sagittarius A*.[130]
Alternatives
See also: Exotic star
The evidence for stellar black holes strongly relies on the existence of an upper limit for the mass of a neutron star. The size of this limit heavily depends on the assumptions made about the properties of dense matter. New exotic phases of matter could push up this bound.[113] A phase of free quarks at high density might allow the existence of dense quark stars,[131] and some supersymmetric models predict the existence of Q stars.[132] Some extensions of the standard model posit the existence of preons as fundamental building blocks of quarks and leptons, which could hypothetically form preon stars.[133] These hypothetical models could potentially explain a number of observations of stellar black hole candidates. However, it can be shown from arguments in general relativity that any such object will have a maximum mass.[113]
Since the average density of a black hole inside its Schwarzschild radius is inversely proportional to the square of its mass, supermassive black holes are much less dense than stellar black holes (the average density of a 108 M☉ black hole is comparable to that of water).[113] Consequently, the physics of matter forming a supermassive black hole is much better understood and the possible alternative explanations for supermassive black hole observations are much more mundane. For example, a supermassive black hole could be modelled by a large cluster of very dark objects. However, such alternatives are typically not stable enough to explain the supermassive black hole candidates.[113]
The evidence for the existence of stellar and supermassive black holes implies that in order for black holes to not form, general relativity must fail as a theory of gravity, perhaps due to the onset of quantum mechanical corrections. A much anticipated feature of a theory of quantum gravity is that it will not feature singularities or event horizons and thus black holes would not be real artifacts.[134] In 2002,[135] much attention has been drawn by the fuzzball model in string theory. Based on calculations for specific situations in string theory, the proposal suggests that generically the individual states of a black hole solution do not have an event horizon or singularity, but that for a classical/semi-classical observer the statistical average of such states appears just as an ordinary black hole as deduced from general relativity.[136]
Open questions
Entropy and thermodynamics
Further information: Black hole thermodynamics




The formula for the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy (S) of a black hole, which depends on the area of the black hole (A). The constants are the speed of light (c), the Boltzmann constant (k), Newton's constant (G), and the reduced Planck constant (ħ).


In 1971, Hawking showed under general conditions[Note 3] that the total area of the event horizons of any collection of classical black holes can never decrease, even if they collide and merge.[137] This result, now known as the second law of black hole mechanics, is remarkably similar to the second law of thermodynamics, which states that the total entropy of a system can never decrease. As with classical objects at absolute zero temperature, it was assumed that black holes had zero entropy. If this were the case, the second law of thermodynamics would be violated by entropy-laden matter entering a black hole, resulting in a decrease of the total entropy of the universe. Therefore, Bekenstein proposed that a black hole should have an entropy, and that it should be proportional to its horizon area.[138]
The link with the laws of thermodynamics was further strengthened by Hawking's discovery that quantum field theory predicts that a black hole radiates blackbody radiation at a constant temperature. This seemingly causes a violation of the second law of black hole mechanics, since the radiation will carry away energy from the black hole causing it to shrink. The radiation, however also carries away entropy, and it can be proven under general assumptions that the sum of the entropy of the matter surrounding a black hole and one quarter of the area of the horizon as measured in Planck units is in fact always increasing. This allows the formulation of the first law of black hole mechanics as an analogue of the first law of thermodynamics, with the mass acting as energy, the surface gravity as temperature and the area as entropy.[138]
One puzzling feature is that the entropy of a black hole scales with its area rather than with its volume, since entropy is normally an extensive quantity that scales linearly with the volume of the system. This odd property led Gerard 't Hooft and Leonard Susskind to propose the holographic principle, which suggests that anything that happens in a volume of spacetime can be described by data on the boundary of that volume.[139]
Although general relativity can be used to perform a semi-classical calculation of black hole entropy, this situation is theoretically unsatisfying. In statistical mechanics, entropy is understood as counting the number of microscopic configurations of a system that have the same macroscopic qualities (such as mass, charge, pressure, etc.). Without a satisfactory theory of quantum gravity, one cannot perform such a computation for black holes. Some progress has been made in various approaches to quantum gravity. In 1995, Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa showed that counting the microstates of a specific supersymmetric black hole in string theory reproduced the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy.[140] Since then, similar results have been reported for different black holes both in string theory and in other approaches to quantum gravity like loop quantum gravity.[141]
Information loss paradox
Main article: Black hole information paradox



Unsolved problem in physics:
Is physical information lost in black holes?
(more unsolved problems in physics)



Because a black hole has only a few internal parameters, most of the information about the matter that went into forming the black hole is lost. Regardless of the type of matter which goes into a black hole, it appears that only information concerning the total mass, charge, and angular momentum are conserved. As long as black holes were thought to persist forever this information loss is not that problematic, as the information can be thought of as existing inside the black hole, inaccessible from the outside. However, black holes slowly evaporate by emitting Hawking radiation. This radiation does not appear to carry any additional information about the matter that formed the black hole, meaning that this information appears to be gone forever.[142]
The question whether information is truly lost in black holes (the black hole information paradox) has divided the theoretical physics community (see Thorne–Hawking–Preskill bet). In quantum mechanics, loss of information corresponds to the violation of vital property called unitarity, which has to do with the conservation of probability. It has been argued that loss of unitarity would also imply violation of conservation of energy.[143] Over recent years evidence has been building that indeed information and unitarity are preserved in a full quantum gravitational treatment of the problem.[144]
See also




Cosmology portal



Star portal



Astronomy portal





List of nearest black holes
Black brane
Black hole complementarity
Black hole starship
Black holes in fiction
Black string
BTZ black hole
Dumb hole
General relativity
Kugelblitz (astrophysics)
List of black holes
Susskind-Hawking battle
Timeline of black hole physics
White hole
Wormhole


Notes

^ The set of possible paths, or more accurately the future light cone containing all possible world lines (in this diagram the light cone is represented by the V-shaped region bounded by arrows representing light ray world lines), is tilted in this way in Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates (the diagram is a "cartoon" version of an Eddington–Finkelstein coordinate diagram), but in other coordinates the light cones are not tilted in this way, for example in Schwarzschild coordinates they simply narrow without tilting as one approaches the event horizon, and in Kruskal–Szekeres coordinates the light cones don't change shape or orientation at all.[49]
^ This is true only for 4-dimensional spacetimes. In higher dimensions more complicated horizon topologies like a black ring are possible.[56][57]
^ In particular, he assumed that all matter satisfies the weak energy condition.

References


^ Wald 1984, pp. 299–300
^ a b Wald, R. M. (1997). "Gravitational Collapse and Cosmic Censorship". arXiv:gr-qc/9710068 [gr-qc]. 
^ Overbye, Dennis (8 June 2015). "Black Hole Hunters". NASA. Retrieved 8 June 2015. 
^ Schutz, Bernard F. (2003). Gravity from the ground up. Cambridge University Press. p. 110. ISBN 0-521-45506-5. 
^ Davies, P. C. W. (1978). "Thermodynamics of Black Holes" (PDF). Reports on Progress in Physics 41 (8): 1313–1355. Bibcode:1978RPPh...41.1313D. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/41/8/004. 
^ a b c d Abbott, B.P.; et al. (2016). "Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger". Phys. Rev. Lett. 116: 061102. arXiv:1602.03837. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102. 
^ O. Straub, F.H. Vincent, M.A. Abramowicz, E. Gourgoulhon, T. Paumard, ``Modelling the black hole silhouette in Sgr A* with ion tori,Astron. Astroph 543 (2012) A8
^ Michell, J. (1784). "On the Means of Discovering the Distance, Magnitude, &c. of the Fixed Stars, in Consequence of the Diminution of the Velocity of Their Light, in Case Such a Diminution Should be Found to Take Place in any of Them, and Such Other Data Should be Procured from Observations, as Would be Farther Necessary for That Purpose". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 74 (0): 35–57. Bibcode:1784RSPT...74...35M. doi:10.1098/rstl.1784.0008. JSTOR 106576. 
^ Gillispie, C. C. (2000). Pierre-Simon Laplace, 1749–1827: a life in exact science. Princeton paperbacks. Princeton University Press. p. 175. ISBN 0-691-05027-9. 
^ Israel, W. (1989). "Dark stars: the evolution of an idea". In Hawking, S. W.; Israel, W. 300 Years of Gravitation. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-37976-2. 
^ Thorne 1994, pp. 123–124
^ a b Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Massenpunktes nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 7: 189–196.  and Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Kugel aus inkompressibler Flüssigkeit nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 18: 424–434. 
^ Droste, J. (1917). "On the field of a single centre in Einstein's theory of gravitation, and the motion of a particle in that field" (PDF). Proceedings Royal Academy Amsterdam 19 (1): 197–215. 
^ Kox, A. J. (1992). "General Relativity in the Netherlands: 1915–1920". In Eisenstaedt, J.; Kox, A. J. Studies in the history of general relativity. Birkhäuser. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-8176-3479-7. [dead link]
^ 't Hooft, G. (2009). "Introduction to the Theory of Black Holes" (PDF). Institute for Theoretical Physics / Spinoza Institute: 47–48. 
^ Eddington, Arthur (1926). The Internal Constitution of the Stars. Cambridge University Press. p. 6. 
^ Kip Thorne comments on this quote on pages 134-135 of his book Black Holes and Time Warps, writing that "The first conclusion was the Newtonian version of light not escaping; the second was a semi-accurate, relativistic description; and the third was typical Eddingtonian hyperbole ... when a star is as small as the critical circumference, the curvature is strong but not infinite, and space is definitely not wrapped around the star. Eddington may have known this, but his description made a good story, and it captured in a whimsical way the spirit of Schwarzschild's spacetime curvature."
^ Venkataraman, G. (1992). Chandrasekhar and his limit. Universities Press. p. 89. ISBN 81-7371-035-X. 
^ Detweiler, S. (1981). "Resource letter BH-1: Black holes". American Journal of Physics 49 (5): 394–400. Bibcode:1981AmJPh..49..394D. doi:10.1119/1.12686. 
^ Harpaz, A. (1994). Stellar evolution. A K Peters. p. 105. ISBN 1-56881-012-1. 
^ a b Oppenheimer, J. R.; Volkoff, G. M. (1939). "On Massive Neutron Cores". Physical Review 55 (4): 374–381. Bibcode:1939PhRv...55..374O. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.55.374. 
^ Ruffini, R.; Wheeler, J. A. (1971). "Introducing the black hole" (PDF). Physics Today 24 (1): 30–41. Bibcode:1971PhT....24a..30R. doi:10.1063/1.3022513. 
^ Finkelstein, D. (1958). "Past-Future Asymmetry of the Gravitational Field of a Point Particle". Physical Review 110 (4): 965–967. Bibcode:1958PhRv..110..965F. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.110.965. 
^ Kruskal, M. (1960). "Maximal Extension of Schwarzschild Metric". Physical Review 119 (5): 1743. Bibcode:1960PhRv..119.1743K. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.119.1743. 
^ Hewish, A.; et al. (1968). "Observation of a Rapidly Pulsating Radio Source". Nature 217 (5130): 709–713. Bibcode:1968Natur.217..709H. doi:10.1038/217709a0 
^ Pilkington, J. D. H.; et al. (1968). "Observations of some further Pulsed Radio Sources". Nature 218 (5137): 126–129. Bibcode:1968Natur.218..126P. doi:10.1038/218126a0 
^ Hewish, A. (1970). "Pulsars". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 8 (1): 265–296. Bibcode:1970ARA&A...8..265H. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.08.090170.001405. 
^ Newman, E. T.; et al. (1965). "Metric of a Rotating, Charged Mass". Journal of Mathematical Physics 6 (6): 918. Bibcode:1965JMP.....6..918N. doi:10.1063/1.1704351 
^ Israel, W. (1967). "Event Horizons in Static Vacuum Space-Times". Physical Review 164 (5): 1776. Bibcode:1967PhRv..164.1776I. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.164.1776. 
^ Carter, B. (1971). "Axisymmetric Black Hole Has Only Two Degrees of Freedom". Physical Review Letters 26 (6): 331. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26..331C. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.331. 
^ Carter, B. (1977). "The vacuum black hole uniqueness theorem and its conceivable generalisations". Proceedings of the 1st Marcel Grossmann meeting on general relativity. pp. 243–254. 
^ Robinson, D. (1975). "Uniqueness of the Kerr Black Hole". Physical Review Letters 34 (14): 905. Bibcode:1975PhRvL..34..905R. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.34.905. 
^ a b Heusler, M. (1998). "Stationary Black Holes: Uniqueness and Beyond". Living Reviews in Relativity 1 (6). doi:10.12942/lrr-1998-6. Archived from the original on 1999-02-03. Retrieved 2011-02-08. 
^ a b Penrose, R. (1965). "Gravitational Collapse and Space-Time Singularities". Physical Review Letters 14 (3): 57. Bibcode:1965PhRvL..14...57P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.14.57. 
^ Ford, L. H. (2003). "The Classical Singularity Theorems and Their Quantum Loopholes". International Journal of Theoretical Physics 42 (6): 1219. doi:10.1023/A:1025754515197. 
^ Bardeen, J. M.; Carter, B.; Hawking, S. W. (1973). "The four laws of black hole mechanics". Communications in Mathematical Physics 31 (2): 161–170. Bibcode:1973CMaPh..31..161B. doi:10.1007/BF01645742. MR MR0334798. Zbl 1125.83309. 
^ a b c Hawking, S. W. (1974). "Black hole explosions?". Nature 248 (5443): 30–31. Bibcode:1974Natur.248...30H. doi:10.1038/248030a0. 
^ Quinion, M. (26 April 2008). "Black Hole". World Wide Words. Retrieved 2008-06-17. 
^ Carroll 2004, p. 253
^ Thorne, K. S.; Price, R. H. (1986). Black holes: the membrane paradigm. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-03770-8. 
^ Anderson, Warren G. (1996). "The Black Hole Information Loss Problem". Usenet Physics FAQ. Retrieved 2009-03-24. 
^ Preskill, J. (1994-10-21). Black holes and information: A crisis in quantum physics (PDF). Caltech Theory Seminar. 
^ Hawking & Ellis 1973, Appendix B
^ Seeds, Michael A.; Backman, Dana E. (2007). Perspectives on Astronomy. Cengage Learning. p. 167. ISBN 0-495-11352-2 
^ Shapiro, S. L.; Teukolsky, S. A. (1983). Black holes, white dwarfs, and neutron stars: the physics of compact objects. John Wiley and Sons. p. 357. ISBN 0-471-87316-0. 
^ Berger, B. K. (2002). "Numerical Approaches to Spacetime Singularities". Living Reviews in Relativity 5: 1. arXiv:gr-qc/0201056. Bibcode:2002LRR.....5....1B. doi:10.12942/lrr-2002-1. Retrieved 2007-08-04. 
^ McClintock, J. E.; Shafee, R.; Narayan, R.; Remillard, R. A.; Davis, S. W.; Li, L.-X. (2006). "The Spin of the Near-Extreme Kerr Black Hole GRS 1915+105". Astrophysical Journal 652 (1): 518–539. arXiv:astro-ph/0606076. Bibcode:2006ApJ...652..518M. doi:10.1086/508457. 
^ Wald 1984, pp. 124–125
^ Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973, p. 848
^ Wheeler 2007, p. 179
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 5.4 and 7.3
^ Carroll 2004, p. 217
^ Carroll 2004, p. 218
^ "Inside a black hole". Knowing the universe and its secrets. Retrieved 2009-03-26. 
^ Carroll 2004, p. 222
^ Emparan, R.; Reall, H. S. (2008). "Black Holes in Higher Dimensions". Living Reviews in Relativity 11 (6). arXiv:0801.3471. Bibcode:2008LRR....11....6E. doi:10.12942/lrr-2008-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10. 
^ Obers, N. A. (2009). Papantonopoulos, Eleftherios, ed. "Black Holes in Higher-Dimensional Gravity". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 211–258. arXiv:0802.0519. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0. 
^ hawking & ellis 1973, Ch. 9.3
^ Carroll 2004, p. 205
^ Carroll 2004, pp. 264–265
^ Carroll 2004, p. 252
^ Lewis, G. F.; Kwan, J. (2007). "No Way Back: Maximizing Survival Time Below the Schwarzschild Event Horizon". Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 24 (2): 46–52. arXiv:0705.1029. Bibcode:2007PASA...24...46L. doi:10.1071/AS07012. 
^ Wheeler 2007, p. 182
^ Carroll 2004, pp. 257–259 and 265–266
^ Droz, S.; Israel, W.; Morsink, S. M. (1996). "Black holes: the inside story". Physics World 9 (1): 34–37. Bibcode:1996PhyW....9...34D. 
^ Carroll 2004, p. 266
^ Poisson, E.; Israel, W. (1990). "Internal structure of black holes". Physical Review D 41 (6): 1796. Bibcode:1990PhRvD..41.1796P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.41.1796. 
^ Wald 1984, p. 212
^ Hamade, R. (1996). "Black Holes and Quantum Gravity". Cambridge Relativity and Cosmology. University of Cambridge. Retrieved 2009-03-26. 
^ Palmer, D. "Ask an Astrophysicist: Quantum Gravity and Black Holes". NASA. Retrieved 2009-03-26. 
^ a b Nitta, Daisuke; Chiba, Takeshi; Sugiyama, Naoshi (September 2011). "Shadows of colliding black holes". Physical Review D 84 (6). arXiv:1106.2425. Bibcode:2011PhRvD..84f3008N. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.84.063008 
^ Nemiroff, R. J. (1993). "Visual distortions near a neutron star and black hole". American Journal of Physics 61 (7): 619. arXiv:astro-ph/9312003. Bibcode:1993AmJPh..61..619N. doi:10.1119/1.17224. 
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.6
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.7
^ Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973
^ Einstein, A. (1939). "On A Stationary System With Spherical Symmetry Consisting of Many Gravitating Masses". Annals of Mathematics 40 (4): 922–936. doi:10.2307/1968902. JSTOR 1968902. 
^ Kerr, R. P. (2009). "The Kerr and Kerr-Schild metrics". In Wiltshire, D. L.; Visser, M.; Scott, S. M. The Kerr Spacetime. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:0706.1109. ISBN 978-0-521-88512-6. 
^ Hawking, S. W.; Penrose, R. (January 1970). "The Singularities of Gravitational Collapse and Cosmology". Proceedings of the Royal Society A 314 (1519): 529–548. Bibcode:1970RSPSA.314..529H. doi:10.1098/rspa.1970.0021. JSTOR 2416467. 
^ a b c Carroll 2004, Section 5.8
^ a b c Rees, M. J.; Volonteri, M. (2007). "Massive black holes: formation and evolution". In Karas, V.; Matt, G. Black Holes from Stars to Galaxies—Across the Range of Masses. Cambridge University Press. pp. 51–58. arXiv:astro-ph/0701512. ISBN 978-0-521-86347-6. 
^ Penrose, R. (2002). "Gravitational Collapse: The Role of General Relativity" (PDF). General Relativity and Gravitation 34 (7): 1141. Bibcode:2002GReGr..34.1141P. doi:10.1023/A:1016578408204. 
^ Carr, B. J. (2005). "Primordial Black Holes: Do They Exist and Are They Useful?". In Suzuki, H.; Yokoyama, J.; Suto, Y.; Sato, K. Inflating Horizon of Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology. Universal Academy Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0511743. ISBN 4-946443-94-0. 
^ Giddings, S. B.; Thomas, S. (2002). "High energy colliders as black hole factories: The end of short distance physics". Physical Review D 65 (5): 056010. arXiv:hep-ph/0106219. Bibcode:2002PhRvD..65e6010G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.65.056010. 
^ Harada, T. (2006). "Is there a black hole minimum mass?". Physical Review D 74 (8): 084004. arXiv:gr-qc/0609055. Bibcode:2006PhRvD..74h4004H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.74.084004. 
^ Arkani–Hamed, N.; Dimopoulos, S.; Dvali, G. (1998). "The hierarchy problem and new dimensions at a millimeter". Physics Letters B 429 (3–4): 263. arXiv:hep-ph/9803315. Bibcode:1998PhLB..429..263A. doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(98)00466-3. 
^ LHC Safety Assessment Group. "Review of the Safety of LHC Collisions" (PDF). CERN. 
^ Cavaglià, M. (2010). "Particle accelerators as black hole factories?". Einstein-Online (Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute)) 4: 1010. 
^ Vesperini, E.; McMillan, S. L. W.; d'Ercole, A.; et al. (2010). "Intermediate-Mass Black Holes in Early Globular Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 713 (1): L41–L44. arXiv:1003.3470. Bibcode:2010ApJ...713L..41V. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/713/1/L41. 
^ Zwart, S. F. P.; Baumgardt, H.; Hut, P.; et al. (2004). "Formation of massive black holes through runaway collisions in dense young star clusters". Nature 428 (6984): 724–6. arXiv:astro-ph/0402622. Bibcode:2004Natur.428..724P. doi:10.1038/nature02448. PMID 15085124. 
^ O'Leary, R. M.; Rasio, F. A.; Fregeau, J. M.; et al. (2006). "Binary Mergers and Growth of Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal 637 (2): 937. arXiv:astro-ph/0508224. Bibcode:2006ApJ...637..937O. doi:10.1086/498446. 
^ Page, D. N. (2005). "Hawking radiation and black hole thermodynamics". New Journal of Physics 7: 203. arXiv:hep-th/0409024. Bibcode:2005NJPh....7..203P. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/7/1/203. 
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 9.6
^ "Evaporating black holes?". Einstein online. Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics. 2010. Retrieved 2010-12-12. 
^ Giddings, S. B.; Mangano, M. L. (2008). "Astrophysical implications of hypothetical stable TeV-scale black holes". Physical Review D 78 (3): 035009. arXiv:0806.3381. Bibcode:2008PhRvD..78c5009G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.78.035009. 
^ Peskin, M. E. (2008). "The end of the world at the Large Hadron Collider?". Physics 1: 14. Bibcode:2008PhyOJ...1...14P. doi:10.1103/Physics.1.14. 
^ Fichtel, C. E.; Bertsch, D. L.; Dingus, B. L.; et al. (1994). "Search of the energetic gamma-ray experiment telescope (EGRET) data for high-energy gamma-ray microsecond bursts". Astrophysical Journal 434 (2): 557–559. Bibcode:1994ApJ...434..557F. doi:10.1086/174758. 
^ Naeye, R. "Testing Fundamental Physics". NASA. Retrieved 2008-09-16. 
^ "Ripped Apart by a Black Hole". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 19 July 2013. 
^ O'Neill, Ian (2 July 2015). "Event Horizon Telescope Will Probe Spacetime's Mysteries". Discovery News. Retrieved 6 December 2015. 
^ Johnson, M. D.; Fish, V. L.; Doeleman, S. S.; Marrone, D. P.; Plambeck, R. L.; Wardle, J. F. C.; Akiyama, K.; Asada, K.; Beaudoin, C. (2015-12-04). "Resolved magnetic-field structure and variability near the event horizon of Sagittarius A*". Science 350 (6265): 1242–1245. arXiv:1512.01220. Bibcode:2015Sci...350.1242J. doi:10.1126/science.aac7087. ISSN 0036-8075. 
^ "Event Horizon Telescope Reveals Magnetic Fields at Milky Way's Central Black Hole". cfa.harvard.edu. 3 December 2015. Retrieved 12 January 2016. 
^ Overbye, Dennis (11 February 2016). "Physicists Detect Gravitational Waves, Proving Einstein Right". New York Times. Retrieved 11 February 2016. 
^ Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Properties of the binary black hole merger GW150914". arXiv:1602.03840. 
^ a b Cardoso, V., Franzin, E., and Pani, P. (2016). "Is the gravitational-wave ringdown a probe of the event horizon?". Physical Review Letters. arXiv:1602.07309. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Tests of general relativity with GW150914". LIGO. Retrieved 12 February 2016. 
^ "Astrophysical Implications of the Binary Black Hole Merger GW150914". Astrophys. J. Lett. 818 (2): L22. arXiv:1602.03846. Bibcode:2016ApJ...818L..22A. doi:10.3847/2041-8205/818/2/L22. 
^ a b Gillessen, S.; Eisenhauer, F.; Trippe, S.; et al. (2009). "Monitoring Stellar Orbits around the Massive Black Hole in the Galactic Center". The Astrophysical Journal 692 (2): 1075. arXiv:0810.4674. Bibcode:2009ApJ...692.1075G. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/692/2/1075. 
^ a b Ghez, A. M.; Klein, B. L.; Morris, M.; et al. (1998). "High Proper‐Motion Stars in the Vicinity of Sagittarius A*: Evidence for a Supermassive Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy". The Astrophysical Journal 509 (2): 678. arXiv:astro-ph/9807210. Bibcode:1998ApJ...509..678G. doi:10.1086/306528. 
^ Broderick, Avery; Loeb, Abraham; Narayan, Ramesh (August 2009). "The Event Horizon of Sagittarius A*". The Astrophysical Journal 701: 1357. arXiv:0903.1105. Bibcode:2009ApJ...701.1357B. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/701/2/1357. 
^ a b "NASA's NuSTAR Sees Rare Blurring of Black Hole Light". NASA. 12 August 2014. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Short-cut method of solution of geodesic equations for Schwarzchild black hole", J.A. Marck, Class.Quant. Grav. 13 (1996) 393-402.
^ a b c McClintock, J. E.; Remillard, R. A. (2006). "Black Hole Binaries". In Lewin, W.; van der Klis, M. Compact Stellar X-ray Sources. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0306213. ISBN 0-521-82659-4.  section 4.1.5.
^ a b c d e f g h i Celotti, A.; Miller, J. C.; Sciama, D. W. (1999). "Astrophysical evidence for the existence of black holes". Classical and Quantum Gravity 16 (12A): A3–A21. arXiv:astro-ph/9912186. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/16/12A/301. 
^ Winter, L. M.; Mushotzky, R. F.; Reynolds, C. S. (2006). "XMM‐Newton Archival Study of the Ultraluminous X‐Ray Population in Nearby Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal 649 (2): 730. arXiv:astro-ph/0512480. Bibcode:2006ApJ...649..730W. doi:10.1086/506579. 
^ information@eso.org. "Hubble directly observes the disc around a black hole". www.spacetelescope.org. Retrieved 2016-03-07. 
^ Muñoz, José A.; Mediavilla, Evencio; Kochanek, Christopher S.; Falco, Emilio; Mosquera, Ana María (2011-12-01). "A Study of Gravitational Lens Chromaticity with the Hubble Space Telescope". The Astrophysical Journal 742 (2): 67. arXiv:1107.5932. Bibcode:2011ApJ...742...67M. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/742/2/67. ISSN 0004-637X. 
^ Bolton, C. T. (1972). "Identification of Cygnus X-1 with HDE 226868". Nature 235 (5336): 271–273. Bibcode:1972Natur.235..271B. doi:10.1038/235271b0. 
^ Webster, B. L.; Murdin, P. (1972). "Cygnus X-1—a Spectroscopic Binary with a Heavy Companion ?". Nature 235 (5332): 37–38. Bibcode:1972Natur.235...37W. doi:10.1038/235037a0. 
^ Rolston, B. (10 November 1997). "The First Black Hole". The bulletin. University of Toronto. Archived from the original on 2008-05-02. Retrieved 2008-03-11. 
^ Shipman, H. L.; Yu, Z; Du, Y.W (1 January 1975). "The implausible history of triple star models for Cygnus X-1 Evidence for a black hole". Astrophysical Letters 16 (1): 9–12. Bibcode:1975ApL....16....9S. doi:10.1016/S0304-8853(99)00384-4. 
^ Narayan, R.; McClintock, J. (2008). "Advection-dominated accretion and the black hole event horizon". New Astronomy Reviews 51 (10–12): 733. arXiv:0803.0322. Bibcode:2008NewAR..51..733N. doi:10.1016/j.newar.2008.03.002. 
^ "NASA scientists identify smallest known black hole" (Press release). Goddard Space Flight Center. 2008-04-01. Retrieved 2009-03-14. 
^ Krolik, J. H. (1999). Active Galactic Nuclei. Princeton University Press. Ch. 1.2. ISBN 0-691-01151-6. 
^ Sparke, L. S.; Gallagher, J. S. (2000). Galaxies in the Universe: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press. Ch. 9.1. ISBN 0-521-59740-4. 
^ Chou, Felicia; Anderson, Janet; Watzke, Megan (5 January 2015). "RELEASE 15-001 - NASA’s Chandra Detects Record-Breaking Outburst from Milky Way’s Black Hole". NASA. Retrieved 6 January 2015. 
^ Kormendy, J.; Richstone, D. (1995). "Inward Bound—The Search For Supermassive Black Holes In Galactic Nuclei". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 33 (1): 581–624. Bibcode:1995ARA&A..33..581K. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.33.090195.003053. 
^ King, A. (2003). "Black Holes, Galaxy Formation, and the MBH-σ Relation". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 596 (1): 27–29. arXiv:astro-ph/0308342. Bibcode:2003ApJ...596L..27K. doi:10.1086/379143. 
^ Ferrarese, L.; Merritt, D. (2000). "A Fundamental Relation Between Supermassive Black Holes and their Host Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 539 (1): 9–12. arXiv:astro-ph/0006053. Bibcode:2000ApJ...539L...9F. doi:10.1086/312838. 
^ "A Black Hole's Dinner is Fast Approaching". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 6 February 2012. 
^ a b Bozza, V. (2010). "Gravitational Lensing by Black Holes". General Relativity and Gravitation 42 (42): 2269–2300. arXiv:0911.2187. Bibcode:2010GReGr..42.2269B. doi:10.1007/s10714-010-0988-2. 
^ Kovacs, Z.; Cheng, K. S.; Harko, T. (2009). "Can stellar mass black holes be quark stars?". Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 400 (3): 1632–1642. arXiv:0908.2672. Bibcode:2009MNRAS.400.1632K. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15571.x. 
^ Kusenko, A. (2006). "Properties and signatures of supersymmetric Q-balls". arXiv:hep-ph/0612159. 
^ Hansson, J.; Sandin, F. (2005). "Preon stars: a new class of cosmic compact objects". Physics Letters B 616 (1–2): 1. arXiv:astro-ph/0410417. Bibcode:2005PhLB..616....1H. doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2005.04.034. 
^ Kiefer, C. (2006). "Quantum gravity: general introduction and recent developments". Annalen der Physik 15 (1–2): 129. arXiv:gr-qc/0508120. Bibcode:2006AnP...518..129K. doi:10.1002/andp.200510175. 
^ "[NKS, Mathur states, 't Hooft-Polyakov monopoles, and Ward-Takahashi identities] - A New Kind of Science: The NKS Forum". wolframscience.com. Retrieved 12 April 2015. 
^ Skenderis, K.; Taylor, M. (2008). "The fuzzball proposal for black holes". Physics Reports 467 (4–5): 117. arXiv:0804.0552. Bibcode:2008PhR...467..117S. doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2008.08.001. 
^ Hawking, S. W. (1971). "Gravitational Radiation from Colliding Black Holes". Physical Review Letters 26 (21): 1344–1346. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26.1344H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.1344. 
^ a b Wald, R. M. (2001). "The Thermodynamics of Black Holes". Living Reviews in Relativity 4: 6. arXiv:gr-qc/9912119. Bibcode:2001LRR.....4....6W. doi:10.12942/lrr-2001-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10. 
^ 't Hooft, G. (2001). "The Holographic Principle". In Zichichi, A. Basics and highlights in fundamental physics. Subnuclear series 37. World Scientific. arXiv:hep-th/0003004. ISBN 978-981-02-4536-8. 
^ Strominger, A.; Vafa, C. (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379 (1–4): 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0. 
^ Carlip, S. (2009). "Black Hole Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 89. arXiv:0807.4520. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6_3. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0. 
^ Hawking, S. W. "Does God Play Dice?". www.hawking.org.uk. Retrieved 2009-03-14. 
^ Giddings, S. B. (1995). "The black hole information paradox". Particles, Strings and Cosmology. Johns Hopkins Workshop on Current Problems in Particle Theory 19 and the PASCOS Interdisciplinary Symposium 5. arXiv:hep-th/9508151. 
^ Mathur, S. D. (2011). The information paradox: conflicts and resolutions. XXV International Symposium on Lepton Photon Interactions at High Energies. arXiv:1201.2079. 


Further reading

Popular reading


Ferguson, Kitty (1991). Black Holes in Space-Time. Watts Franklin. ISBN 0-531-12524-6. 
Hawking, Stephen (1988). A Brief History of Time. Bantam Books, Inc. ISBN 0-553-38016-8. 
Hawking, Stephen; Penrose, Roger (1996). The Nature of Space and Time. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-03791-4. 
Melia, Fulvio (2003). The Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy. Princeton U Press. ISBN 978-0-691-09505-9. 
Melia, Fulvio (2003). The Edge of Infinity. Supermassive Black Holes in the Universe. Cambridge U Press. ISBN 978-0-521-81405-8. 
Pickover, Clifford (1998). Black Holes: A Traveler's Guide. Wiley, John & Sons, Inc. ISBN 0-471-19704-1. 
Thorne, Kip S. (1994). Black Holes and Time Warps. Norton, W. W. & Company, Inc. ISBN 0-393-31276-3. 
Wheeler, J. Craig (2007). Cosmic Catastrophes (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-85714-7. 


University textbooks and monographs


Carroll, Sean M. (2004). Spacetime and Geometry. Addison Wesley. ISBN 0-8053-8732-3. , the lecture notes on which the book was based are available for free from Sean Carroll's website.
Carter, B. (1973). "Black hole equilibrium states". In DeWitt, B. S.; DeWitt, C. Black Holes. 
Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan (1999). Mathematical Theory of Black Holes. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-850370-9. 
Frolov, V. P.; Novikov, I. D. (1998). "Black hole physics". 
Frolov, Valeri P.; Zelnikov, Andrei (2011). Introduction to Black Hole Physics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-969229-3. Zbl 1234.83001. 
Hawking, S. W.; Ellis, G. F. R. (1973). Large Scale Structure of space time. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-09906-4. 
Melia, Fulvio (2007). The Galactic Supermassive Black Hole. Princeton U Press. ISBN 978-0-691-13129-0. 
Misner, Charles; Thorne, Kip S.; Wheeler, John (1973). Gravitation. W. H. Freeman and Company. ISBN 0-7167-0344-0. 
Taylor, Edwin F.; Wheeler, John Archibald (2000). Exploring Black Holes. Addison Wesley Longman. ISBN 0-201-38423-X. 
Wald, Robert M. (1984). General Relativity. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-87033-5. 
Wald, Robert M. (1992). Space, Time, and Gravity: The Theory of the Big Bang and Black Holes. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-87029-4. 
Black holes Teviet Creighton, Richard H. Price Scholarpedia 3(1):4277. doi:10.4249/scholarpedia.4277


Review papers


Gallo, Elena; Marolf, Donald (2009). "Resource Letter BH-2: Black Holes". American Journal of Physics 77 (4): 294. arXiv:0806.2316. Bibcode:2009AmJPh..77..294G. doi:10.1119/1.3056569. 
Hughes, Scott A. (2005). "Trust but verify: The case for astrophysical black holes". arXiv:hep-ph/0511217.  Lecture notes from 2005 SLAC Summer Institute.

External links



Find more about
Black hole
at Wikipedia's sister projects




Media from Commons



News stories from Wikinews



Quotations from Wikiquote



Source texts from Wikisource



Textbooks from Wikibooks



Learning resources from Wikiversity




Black Holes on In Our Time at the BBC. (listen now)
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Singularities and Black Holes" by Erik Curiel and Peter Bokulich.
Black Holes: Gravity's Relentless Pull—Interactive multimedia Web site about the physics and astronomy of black holes from the Space Telescope Science Institute
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on Black Holes
"Schwarzschild Geometry"
Advanced Mathematics of Black Hole Evaporation
Hubble site


Videos


16-year-long study tracks stars orbiting Milky Way black hole
Movie of Black Hole Candidate from Max Planck Institute
Nature.com 2015-04-20 3D simulations of colliding black holes
Computer visualisation of the signal detected by LIGO
Two Black Holes Merge into One (based upon the signal GW150914









v
t
e


Black holes






Types



Schwarzschild
Rotating
Charged
Virtual
Binary











Size



Micro
Extremal

Electron


Stellar
Intermediate-mass
Supermassive
Quasar

Active galactic nucleus
Blazar
Large quasar group










Formation



Stellar evolution
Gravitational collapse
Neutron star

Related links


Compact star

Quark
Exotic


Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit
White dwarf

Related links


Supernova

Related links


Hypernova
Gamma-ray burst








Properties



Thermodynamics
Schwarzschild radius
M–sigma relation
Event horizon
Quasi-periodic oscillation
Photon sphere
Ergosphere
Hawking radiation
Penrose process
Blandford–Znajek process
Bondi accretion
Spaghettification
Gravitational lens








Models



Gravitational singularity

Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems


Primordial black hole
Gravastar
Dark star
Dark-energy star
Black star
Eternally collapsing object

Magnetospheric eternally collapsing object


Fuzzball
White hole
Naked singularity
Ring singularity
Immirzi parameter
Membrane paradigm
Kugelblitz
Wormhole
Quasi-star








Issues



No-hair theorem
Information paradox
Cosmic censorship
Alternative models
Holographic principle
Black hole complementarity
firewall (physics)
ER=EPR








Metrics



Schwarzschild
Kerr
Reissner–Nordström
Kerr–Newman








Lists



Black holes
Most massive
Quasars








Related



Timeline of black hole physics
Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer
Hypercompact stellar system
Black hole starship
















v
t
e


Relativity






Special
relativity





Background




Principle of relativity
Introduction to special relativity
Special relativity









Foundations




Frame of reference
Speed of light
Rapidity
Maxwell's equations









Formulation




Galilean relativity
Galilean transformation
Lorentz transformation









Consequences




Time dilation
Relativistic mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Length contraction
Relativity of simultaneity
Relativistic Doppler effect
Thomas precession
Relativistic disks









Spacetime




Light cone
World line
Spacetime diagram
Biquaternions
Minkowski space














General
relativity





Background




Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Resources









Fundamental
concepts




Special relativity
Equivalence principle
World line
Riemannian geometry
Minkowski diagram









Phenomena




Black hole
Event horizon
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Lenses
Singularity
Waves
Ladder paradox
Twin paradox
Two-body problem









Equations




ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
Einstein field equations
Geodesic equation
Friedmann equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation









Advanced
theories




Brans–Dicke theory
Kaluza–Klein
Mach's principle
Quantum gravity









Solutions




Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Taub–NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust











Scientists



Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedmann
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Taylor
Hulse
Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
Weiss
Bondi
Misner
others
















v
t
e


String theory






Background



Strings
History of string theory

First superstring revolution
Second superstring revolution


String theory landscape











Theory



Nambu–Goto action
Polyakov action
Bosonic string theory
Superstring theory

Type I string
Type II string

Type IIA string theory
Type IIB string theory


Heterotic string


N=2 superstring
F-theory
String field theory
Matrix string theory
Nonlinear sigma model
Tachyon condensation
RNS formalism








Concepts





String duality




T-duality
S-duality
U-duality
Montonen–Olive duality
Mysterious duality









Particles and fields




Graviton
Dilaton
Tachyon
Ramond–Ramond field
Kalb–Ramond field
Magnetic monopole









Branes




D-brane
S-brane
Black brane
Black holes
Black string
Brane cosmology
Quiver diagram
Hanany–Witten transition











Conformal
field theory



Virasoro algebra
Mirror symmetry
Conformal anomaly
Conformal algebra
Superconformal algebra
Vertex operator algebra
Loop algebra
Kac–Moody algebra
Wess–Zumino–Witten model








Gauge theory



Anomalies
Instantons
Chern–Simons form
Bogomol'nyi–Prasad–Sommerfield bound
Exceptional Lie groups (G2, F4, E6, E7, E8)
ADE classification
Dirac string
P-form electrodynamics








Geometry



Kaluza–Klein theory
Compactification
Why 10 dimensions?
Kähler manifold
Ricci-flat manifold

Calabi–Yau manifold
Hyperkähler manifold

K3 surface


G2 manifold
Spin(7) manifold


Generalized complex manifold
Orbifold
Conifold
Orientifold
Moduli space
Hořava–Witten domain wall
K-theory (physics)
Twisted K-theory








Supersymmetry



Supergravity
Superspace
Lie superalgebra
Lie supergroup








Holography



Holographic principle
AdS/CFT correspondence








M-theory



Matrix theory
Introduction to M-theory








String theorists



Nima Arkani-Hamed
Michael Francis Atiyah
Tom Banks
David Berenstein
Gerald Cleaver
Robbert Dijkgraaf
Jacques Distler
Michael Douglas
Michael Duff
Sergio Ferrara
Willy Fischler
Daniel Friedan
Rajesh Gopakumar
Michael Green
Brian Greene
David Gross
Steven Gubser
Sergei Gukov
Jeffrey Harvey
Petr Hořava
Gary Gibbons
Michio Kaku
Renata Kallosh
Theodor Kaluza
Anton Kapustin
Igor Klebanov
Oskar Klein
Hong Liu
Juan Maldacena
Donald Marolf
Emil Martinecm
Shiraz Minwalla
Gregory Moore
Lubos Motl
Sunil Mukhi
Robert Myers
Asad Naqvi
K. S. Narain
Horatiu Nastase
Nikita Nekrasov
André Neveu
Dimitri Nanopoulos
Holger Bech Nielsen
Peter van Nieuwenhuizen
Hirosi Ooguri
Joseph Polchinski
Alexander Polyakov
Arvind Rajaraman
Lisa Randall
Seifallah Randjbar-Daemi
Martin Rocek
John H. Schwarz
Nathan Seiberg
Ashoke Sen
Steve Shenker
Warren Siegel
Eva Silverstein
Matthias Staudacher
Andrew Strominger
Leonard Susskind
Paul Townsend
Sandip Trivedi
Cumrun Vafa
Gabriele Veneziano
Erik Verlinde
Herman Verlinde
Edward Witten
Tamiaki Yoneya
Alexander Zamolodchikov
Alexei Zamolodchikov
Barton Zwiebach













Authority control



GND: 4053793-6
BNF: cb11933630s (data)
NDL: 00561056











For other uses, see Black hole (disambiguation).Black hole (disambiguation)



Simulation of gravitational lensing by a black hole, which distorts the image of a galaxy in the background




Simulation of gravitational lensing by a black hole, which distorts the image of a galaxy in the background


Simulation of gravitational lensing by a black hole, which distorts the image of a galaxy in the backgroundgravitational lensinggalaxy

General relativity












Introduction
History



Mathematical formulation



Resources
Tests









Fundamental concepts


Equivalence principle
Special relativity
World line
Riemannian geometry








Phenomena





Kepler problem
Gravitational lensing
Gravitational waves
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Event horizon
Singularity
Black hole




Spacetime




Spacetime diagrams
Minkowski spacetime
Einstein–Rosen bridge














Equations
Formalisms






Equations




Linearized gravity
Einstein field equations
Friedmann
Geodesics
Mathisson–Papapetrou–Dixon
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein




Formalisms




ADM
BSSN
Post-Newtonian




Advanced theory




Kaluza–Klein theory
Quantum gravity











Solutions


Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Lemaître–Tolman
Taub-NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust








Scientists


Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedman
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Raychaudhuri
Taylor
Hulse
van Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
others









v
t
e





General relativity
General relativityGeneral relativity











Introduction
History



Mathematical formulation



Resources
Tests










Introduction
History



Mathematical formulation



Resources
Tests








Introduction
History



Mathematical formulation



Resources
Tests






Introduction
History




Introduction
History


Introduction
History
IntroductionIntroductionHistoryHistoryMathematical formulationMathematical formulation


Resources
Tests




Resources
Tests


Resources
Tests
ResourcesResourcesTestsTests


Fundamental concepts


Equivalence principle
Special relativity
World line
Riemannian geometry






Fundamental concepts


Equivalence principle
Special relativity
World line
Riemannian geometry




Fundamental concepts


Equivalence principle
Special relativity
World line
Riemannian geometry


Fundamental concepts

Equivalence principle
Special relativity
World line
Riemannian geometry


Equivalence principle
Special relativity
World line
Riemannian geometry
Equivalence principleEquivalence principleSpecial relativitySpecial relativityWorld lineWorld lineRiemannian geometryRiemannian geometry


Phenomena





Kepler problem
Gravitational lensing
Gravitational waves
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Event horizon
Singularity
Black hole




Spacetime




Spacetime diagrams
Minkowski spacetime
Einstein–Rosen bridge









Phenomena





Kepler problem
Gravitational lensing
Gravitational waves
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Event horizon
Singularity
Black hole




Spacetime




Spacetime diagrams
Minkowski spacetime
Einstein–Rosen bridge







Phenomena





Kepler problem
Gravitational lensing
Gravitational waves
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Event horizon
Singularity
Black hole




Spacetime




Spacetime diagrams
Minkowski spacetime
Einstein–Rosen bridge





Phenomena




Kepler problem
Gravitational lensing
Gravitational waves
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Event horizon
Singularity
Black hole




Spacetime




Spacetime diagrams
Minkowski spacetime
Einstein–Rosen bridge








Kepler problem
Gravitational lensing
Gravitational waves
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Event horizon
Singularity
Black hole




Spacetime




Spacetime diagrams
Minkowski spacetime
Einstein–Rosen bridge






Kepler problem
Gravitational lensing
Gravitational waves
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Event horizon
Singularity
Black hole




Kepler problem
Gravitational lensing
Gravitational waves
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Event horizon
Singularity
Black hole


Kepler problem
Gravitational lensing
Gravitational waves
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Event horizon
Singularity
Black hole
Kepler problemKepler problemGravitational lensingGravitational lensingGravitational wavesGravitational wavesFrame-draggingFrame-draggingGeodetic effectGeodetic effectEvent horizonEvent horizonSingularitySingularityBlack holeBlack hole
Spacetime
SpacetimeSpacetime


Spacetime diagrams
Minkowski spacetime
Einstein–Rosen bridge




Spacetime diagrams
Minkowski spacetime
Einstein–Rosen bridge


Spacetime diagrams
Minkowski spacetime
Einstein–Rosen bridge
Spacetime diagramsSpacetime diagramsMinkowski spacetimeMinkowski spacetimeEinstein–Rosen bridgeEinstein–Rosen bridge





Equations
Formalisms






Equations




Linearized gravity
Einstein field equations
Friedmann
Geodesics
Mathisson–Papapetrou–Dixon
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein




Formalisms




ADM
BSSN
Post-Newtonian




Advanced theory




Kaluza–Klein theory
Quantum gravity












Equations
Formalisms






Equations




Linearized gravity
Einstein field equations
Friedmann
Geodesics
Mathisson–Papapetrou–Dixon
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein




Formalisms




ADM
BSSN
Post-Newtonian




Advanced theory




Kaluza–Klein theory
Quantum gravity










Equations
Formalisms






Equations




Linearized gravity
Einstein field equations
Friedmann
Geodesics
Mathisson–Papapetrou–Dixon
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein




Formalisms




ADM
BSSN
Post-Newtonian




Advanced theory




Kaluza–Klein theory
Quantum gravity








Equations
Formalisms




Equations
Formalisms


Equations
Formalisms
EquationsFormalisms


Equations




Linearized gravity
Einstein field equations
Friedmann
Geodesics
Mathisson–Papapetrou–Dixon
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein




Formalisms




ADM
BSSN
Post-Newtonian




Advanced theory




Kaluza–Klein theory
Quantum gravity






Equations




Linearized gravity
Einstein field equations
Friedmann
Geodesics
Mathisson–Papapetrou–Dixon
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein




Formalisms




ADM
BSSN
Post-Newtonian




Advanced theory




Kaluza–Klein theory
Quantum gravity




Equations
Equations


Linearized gravity
Einstein field equations
Friedmann
Geodesics
Mathisson–Papapetrou–Dixon
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein




Linearized gravity
Einstein field equations
Friedmann
Geodesics
Mathisson–Papapetrou–Dixon
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein


Linearized gravity
Einstein field equations
Friedmann
Geodesics
Mathisson–Papapetrou–Dixon
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein
Linearized gravityLinearized gravityEinstein field equationsEinstein field equationsFriedmannFriedmannGeodesicsGeodesicsMathisson–Papapetrou–DixonMathisson–Papapetrou–DixonHamilton–Jacobi–EinsteinHamilton–Jacobi–Einstein
Formalisms
Formalisms


ADM
BSSN
Post-Newtonian




ADM
BSSN
Post-Newtonian


ADM
BSSN
Post-Newtonian
ADMADMBSSNBSSNPost-NewtonianPost-Newtonian
Advanced theory
Advanced theory


Kaluza–Klein theory
Quantum gravity




Kaluza–Klein theory
Quantum gravity


Kaluza–Klein theory
Quantum gravity
Kaluza–Klein theoryKaluza–Klein theoryQuantum gravityQuantum gravity


Solutions


Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Lemaître–Tolman
Taub-NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust






Solutions


Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Lemaître–Tolman
Taub-NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust




Solutions


Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Lemaître–Tolman
Taub-NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust


SolutionsSolutions

Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Lemaître–Tolman
Taub-NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust


Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Lemaître–Tolman
Taub-NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust
SchwarzschildSchwarzschildReissner–NordströmReissner–NordströmGödelGödelKerrKerrKerr–NewmanKerr–NewmanKasnerKasnerLemaître–TolmanLemaître–TolmanTaub-NUTTaub-NUTMilneMilneRobertson–WalkerRobertson–Walkerpp-wavepp-wavevan Stockum dustvan Stockum dust


Scientists


Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedman
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Raychaudhuri
Taylor
Hulse
van Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
others






Scientists


Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedman
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Raychaudhuri
Taylor
Hulse
van Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
others




Scientists


Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedman
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Raychaudhuri
Taylor
Hulse
van Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
others


Scientists

Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedman
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Raychaudhuri
Taylor
Hulse
van Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
others


Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedman
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Raychaudhuri
Taylor
Hulse
van Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
others
EinsteinEinsteinLorentzLorentzHilbertHilbertPoincaréPoincaréSchwarzschildSchwarzschildde Sitterde SitterReissnerReissnerNordströmNordströmWeylWeylEddingtonEddingtonFriedmanFriedmanMilneMilneZwickyZwickyLemaîtreLemaîtreGödelGödelWheelerWheelerRobertsonRobertsonBardeenBardeenWalkerWalkerKerrKerrChandrasekharChandrasekharEhlersEhlersPenrosePenroseHawkingHawkingRaychaudhuriRaychaudhuriTaylorTaylorHulseHulsevan Stockumvan StockumTaubTaubNewmanNewmanYauYauThorneThorneothersothersothers



v
t
e






v
t
e




v
t
e


v
t
e
vvvttteeeA black hole is a region of spacetime exhibiting such strong gravitational effects that nothing—including particles and electromagnetic radiation such as light—can escape from inside it.[1] The theory of general relativity predicts that a sufficiently compact mass can deform spacetime to form a black hole.[2][3] The boundary of the region from which no escape is possible is called the event horizon. Although crossing the event horizon has enormous effect on the fate of the object crossing it, it appears to have no locally detectable features. In many ways a black hole acts like an ideal black body, as it reflects no light.[4][5] Moreover, quantum field theory in curved spacetime predicts that event horizons emit Hawking radiation, with the same spectrum as a black body of a temperature inversely proportional to its mass. This temperature is on the order of billionths of a kelvin for black holes of stellar mass, making it essentially impossible to observe.black holespacetimegravitationalparticleselectromagnetic radiation[1][1]general relativitymassspacetime[2][2][3][3]event horizonblack body[4][4][5][5]quantum field theory in curved spacetimeHawking radiationthe same spectrumblack holes of stellar massObjects whose gravitational fields are too strong for light to escape were first considered in the 18th century by John Michell and Pierre-Simon Laplace. The first modern solution of general relativity that would characterize a black hole was found by Karl Schwarzschild in 1916, although its interpretation as a region of space from which nothing can escape was first published by David Finkelstein in 1958. Black holes were long considered a mathematical curiosity; it was during the 1960s that theoretical work showed they were a generic prediction of general relativity. The discovery of neutron stars sparked interest in gravitationally collapsed compact objects as a possible astrophysical reality.gravitational fieldsJohn MichellPierre-Simon LaplaceKarl SchwarzschildDavid Finkelsteinneutron starsgravitationally collapsedBlack holes of stellar mass are expected to form when very massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycle. After a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing mass from its surroundings. By absorbing other stars and merging with other black holes, supermassive black holes of millions of solar masses (M☉) may form. There is general consensus that supermassive black holes exist in the centers of most galaxies.supermassive black holessolar massesM☉M☉galaxiesDespite its invisible interior, the presence of a black hole can be inferred through its interaction with other matter and with electromagnetic radiation such as visible light. Matter that falls onto a black hole can form an external accretion disk heated by friction, forming some of the brightest objects in the universe. If there are other stars orbiting a black hole, their orbits can be used to determine the black hole's mass and location. Such observations can be used to exclude possible alternatives such as neutron stars. In this way, astronomers have identified numerous stellar black hole candidates in binary systems, and established that the radio source known as Sagittarius A*, at the core of our own Milky Way galaxy, contains a supermassive black hole of about 4.3 million solar masses.matterelectromagnetic radiationaccretion diskbrightest objects in the universebinary systemsSagittarius A*Milky Waysolar massesOn 11 February 2016, the LIGO collaboration announced the first observation of gravitational waves; because these waves were generated from a black hole merger it was the first ever direct detection of a binary black hole merger.[6]LIGOannounced the first observationgravitational waves[6][6]



Predicted appearance of non-rotating black hole with toroidal ring of ionised matter, such as has been proposed[7] as a model for Sagittarius A*. The asymmetry is due to the Doppler effect resulting from the enormous orbital speed needed for centrifugal balance of the very strong gravitational attraction of the hole.




Predicted appearance of non-rotating black hole with toroidal ring of ionised matter, such as has been proposed[7] as a model for Sagittarius A*. The asymmetry is due to the Doppler effect resulting from the enormous orbital speed needed for centrifugal balance of the very strong gravitational attraction of the hole.


Predicted appearance of non-rotating black hole with toroidal ring of ionised matter, such as has been proposed[7] as a model for Sagittarius A*. The asymmetry is due to the Doppler effect resulting from the enormous orbital speed needed for centrifugal balance of the very strong gravitational attraction of the hole.[7][7]Sagittarius A*Doppler effect

Contents


1 History

1.1 General relativity
1.2 Golden age


2 Properties and structure

2.1 Physical properties
2.2 Event horizon
2.3 Singularity
2.4 Photon sphere
2.5 Ergosphere
2.6 Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)


3 Formation and evolution

3.1 Gravitational collapse

3.1.1 Primordial black holes in the Big Bang


3.2 High-energy collisions
3.3 Growth
3.4 Evaporation


4 Observational evidence

4.1 Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes
4.2 Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*
4.3 Accretion of matter
4.4 X-ray binaries

4.4.1 Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow
4.4.2 Quasi-periodic oscillations


4.5 Galactic nuclei
4.6 Microlensing (proposed)
4.7 Alternatives


5 Open questions

5.1 Entropy and thermodynamics
5.2 Information loss paradox


6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links


Contents
Contents
1 History

1.1 General relativity
1.2 Golden age


2 Properties and structure

2.1 Physical properties
2.2 Event horizon
2.3 Singularity
2.4 Photon sphere
2.5 Ergosphere
2.6 Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)


3 Formation and evolution

3.1 Gravitational collapse

3.1.1 Primordial black holes in the Big Bang


3.2 High-energy collisions
3.3 Growth
3.4 Evaporation


4 Observational evidence

4.1 Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes
4.2 Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*
4.3 Accretion of matter
4.4 X-ray binaries

4.4.1 Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow
4.4.2 Quasi-periodic oscillations


4.5 Galactic nuclei
4.6 Microlensing (proposed)
4.7 Alternatives


5 Open questions

5.1 Entropy and thermodynamics
5.2 Information loss paradox


6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 Further reading
10 External links
1 History

1.1 General relativity
1.2 Golden age

1 History1History
1.1 General relativity
1.2 Golden age
1.1 General relativity1.1 General relativity1.1General relativity1.2 Golden age1.2 Golden age1.2Golden age2 Properties and structure

2.1 Physical properties
2.2 Event horizon
2.3 Singularity
2.4 Photon sphere
2.5 Ergosphere
2.6 Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)

2 Properties and structure2Properties and structure
2.1 Physical properties
2.2 Event horizon
2.3 Singularity
2.4 Photon sphere
2.5 Ergosphere
2.6 Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)
2.1 Physical properties2.1 Physical properties2.1Physical properties2.2 Event horizon2.2 Event horizon2.2Event horizon2.3 Singularity2.3 Singularity2.3Singularity2.4 Photon sphere2.4 Photon sphere2.4Photon sphere2.5 Ergosphere2.5 Ergosphere2.5Ergosphere2.6 Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)2.6 Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)2.6Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)3 Formation and evolution

3.1 Gravitational collapse

3.1.1 Primordial black holes in the Big Bang


3.2 High-energy collisions
3.3 Growth
3.4 Evaporation

3 Formation and evolution3Formation and evolution
3.1 Gravitational collapse

3.1.1 Primordial black holes in the Big Bang


3.2 High-energy collisions
3.3 Growth
3.4 Evaporation
3.1 Gravitational collapse

3.1.1 Primordial black holes in the Big Bang

3.1 Gravitational collapse3.1Gravitational collapse
3.1.1 Primordial black holes in the Big Bang
3.1.1 Primordial black holes in the Big Bang3.1.1 Primordial black holes in the Big Bang3.1.1Primordial black holes in the Big Bang3.2 High-energy collisions3.2 High-energy collisions3.2High-energy collisions3.3 Growth3.3 Growth3.3Growth3.4 Evaporation3.4 Evaporation3.4Evaporation4 Observational evidence

4.1 Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes
4.2 Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*
4.3 Accretion of matter
4.4 X-ray binaries

4.4.1 Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow
4.4.2 Quasi-periodic oscillations


4.5 Galactic nuclei
4.6 Microlensing (proposed)
4.7 Alternatives

4 Observational evidence4Observational evidence
4.1 Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes
4.2 Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*
4.3 Accretion of matter
4.4 X-ray binaries

4.4.1 Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow
4.4.2 Quasi-periodic oscillations


4.5 Galactic nuclei
4.6 Microlensing (proposed)
4.7 Alternatives
4.1 Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes4.1 Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes4.1Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes4.2 Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*4.2 Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*4.2Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*4.3 Accretion of matter4.3 Accretion of matter4.3Accretion of matter4.4 X-ray binaries

4.4.1 Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow
4.4.2 Quasi-periodic oscillations

4.4 X-ray binaries4.4X-ray binaries
4.4.1 Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow
4.4.2 Quasi-periodic oscillations
4.4.1 Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow4.4.1 Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow4.4.1Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow4.4.2 Quasi-periodic oscillations4.4.2 Quasi-periodic oscillations4.4.2Quasi-periodic oscillations4.5 Galactic nuclei4.5 Galactic nuclei4.5Galactic nuclei4.6 Microlensing (proposed)4.6 Microlensing (proposed)4.6Microlensing (proposed)4.7 Alternatives4.7 Alternatives4.7Alternatives5 Open questions

5.1 Entropy and thermodynamics
5.2 Information loss paradox

5 Open questions5Open questions
5.1 Entropy and thermodynamics
5.2 Information loss paradox
5.1 Entropy and thermodynamics5.1 Entropy and thermodynamics5.1Entropy and thermodynamics5.2 Information loss paradox5.2 Information loss paradox5.2Information loss paradox6 See also6 See also6See also7 Notes7 Notes7Notes8 References8 References8References9 Further reading9 Further reading9Further reading10 External links10 External links10External linksHistoryHistory



Simulated view of a black hole in front of the Large Magellanic Cloud. Note the gravitational lensing effect, which produces two enlarged but highly distorted views of the Cloud. Across the top, the Milky Way disk appears distorted into an arc.




Simulated view of a black hole in front of the Large Magellanic Cloud. Note the gravitational lensing effect, which produces two enlarged but highly distorted views of the Cloud. Across the top, the Milky Way disk appears distorted into an arc.


Simulated view of a black hole in front of the Large Magellanic Cloud. Note the gravitational lensing effect, which produces two enlarged but highly distorted views of the Cloud. Across the top, the Milky Way disk appears distorted into an arc.Large Magellanic Cloudgravitational lensingMilky WayThe idea of a body so massive that even light could not escape was first put forward by John Michell in a letter written in 1783 to Henry Cavendish of the Royal Society:John MichellHenry CavendishRoyal Society
If the semi-diameter of a sphere of the same density as the Sun were to exceed that of the Sun in the proportion of 500 to 1, a body falling from an infinite height towards it would have acquired at its surface greater velocity than that of light, and consequently supposing light to be attracted by the same force in proportion to its vis inertiae, with other bodies, all light emitted from such a body would be made to return towards it by its own proper gravity.
— John Michell[8]
If the semi-diameter of a sphere of the same density as the Sun were to exceed that of the Sun in the proportion of 500 to 1, a body falling from an infinite height towards it would have acquired at its surface greater velocity than that of light, and consequently supposing light to be attracted by the same force in proportion to its vis inertiae, with other bodies, all light emitted from such a body would be made to return towards it by its own proper gravity.— John Michell[8]— John Michell[8][8][8]In 1796, mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace promoted the same idea in the first and second editions of his book Exposition du système du Monde (it was removed from later editions).[9][10] Such "dark stars" were largely ignored in the nineteenth century, since it was not understood how a massless wave such as light could be influenced by gravity.[11]Pierre-Simon LaplaceExposition du système du Monde[9][9][10][10]dark stars[11][11]General relativityGeneral relativityIn 1915, Albert Einstein developed his theory of general relativity, having earlier shown that gravity does influence light's motion. Only a few months later, Karl Schwarzschild found a solution to the Einstein field equations, which describes the gravitational field of a point mass and a spherical mass.[12] A few months after Schwarzschild, Johannes Droste, a student of Hendrik Lorentz, independently gave the same solution for the point mass and wrote more extensively about its properties.[13][14] This solution had a peculiar behaviour at what is now called the Schwarzschild radius, where it became singular, meaning that some of the terms in the Einstein equations became infinite. The nature of this surface was not quite understood at the time. In 1924, Arthur Eddington showed that the singularity disappeared after a change of coordinates (see Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates), although it took until 1933 for Georges Lemaître to realize that this meant the singularity at the Schwarzschild radius was an unphysical coordinate singularity.[15] Arthur Eddington did however comment on the possibility of a star with mass compressed to the Schwarzschild radius in a 1926 book, noting that Einstein's theory allows us to rule out overly large densities for visible stars like Betelgeuse because "a star of 250 million km radius could not possibly have so high a density as the sun. Firstly, the force of gravitation would be so great that light would be unable to escape from it, the rays falling back to the star like a stone to the earth. Secondly, the red shift of the spectral lines would be so great that the spectrum would be shifted out of existence. Thirdly, the mass would produce so much curvature of the space-time metric that space would close up around the star, leaving us outside (i.e., nowhere)."[16][17]Albert Einsteingeneral relativityKarl SchwarzschildsolutionEinstein field equationsgravitational fieldpoint mass[12][12]Hendrik Lorentz[13][13][14][14]Schwarzschild radiussingularArthur EddingtonEddington–Finkelstein coordinatesGeorges Lemaîtrecoordinate singularity[15][15][16][16][17][17]In 1931, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar calculated, using special relativity, that a non-rotating body of electron-degenerate matter above a certain limiting mass (now called the Chandrasekhar limit at 1.4 M☉) has no stable solutions.[18] His arguments were opposed by many of his contemporaries like Eddington and Lev Landau, who argued that some yet unknown mechanism would stop the collapse.[19] They were partly correct: a white dwarf slightly more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit will collapse into a neutron star,[20] which is itself stable because of the Pauli exclusion principle. But in 1939, Robert Oppenheimer and others predicted that neutron stars above approximately 3 M☉ (the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit) would collapse into black holes for the reasons presented by Chandrasekhar, and concluded that no law of physics was likely to intervene and stop at least some stars from collapsing to black holes.[21]Subrahmanyan Chandrasekharelectron-degenerate matterChandrasekhar limitM☉[18][18]Lev Landau[19][19]white dwarfneutron star[20][20]Pauli exclusion principleRobert OppenheimerM☉Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit[21][21]Oppenheimer and his co-authors interpreted the singularity at the boundary of the Schwarzschild radius as indicating that this was the boundary of a bubble in which time stopped. This is a valid point of view for external observers, but not for infalling observers. Because of this property, the collapsed stars were called "frozen stars",[22] because an outside observer would see the surface of the star frozen in time at the instant where its collapse takes it inside the Schwarzschild radius.[22][22]Golden ageGolden ageSee also: History of general relativityHistory of general relativityIn 1958, David Finkelstein identified the Schwarzschild surface as an event horizon, "a perfect unidirectional membrane: causal influences can cross it in only one direction".[23] This did not strictly contradict Oppenheimer's results, but extended them to include the point of view of infalling observers. Finkelstein's solution extended the Schwarzschild solution for the future of observers falling into a black hole. A complete extension had already been found by Martin Kruskal, who was urged to publish it.[24]David Finkelsteinevent horizon[23][23]Finkelstein's solutioncomplete extensionMartin Kruskal[24][24]These results came at the beginning of the golden age of general relativity, which was marked by general relativity and black holes becoming mainstream subjects of research. This process was helped by the discovery of pulsars in 1967,[25][26] which, by 1969, were shown to be rapidly rotating neutron stars.[27] Until that time, neutron stars, like black holes, were regarded as just theoretical curiosities; but the discovery of pulsars showed their physical relevance and spurred a further interest in all types of compact objects that might be formed by gravitational collapse.golden age of general relativitypulsars[25][25][26][26]neutron stars[27][27]In this period more general black hole solutions were found. In 1963, Roy Kerr found the exact solution for a rotating black hole. Two years later, Ezra Newman found the axisymmetric solution for a black hole that is both rotating and electrically charged.[28] Through the work of Werner Israel,[29] Brandon Carter,[30][31] and David Robinson[32] the no-hair theorem emerged, stating that a stationary black hole solution is completely described by the three parameters of the Kerr–Newman metric: mass, angular momentum, and electric charge.[33]Roy Kerrthe exact solutionrotating black holeEzra Newmanaxisymmetricelectrically charged[28][28]Werner Israel[29][29]Brandon Carter[30][30][31][31][32][32]no-hair theoremKerr–Newman metricmassangular momentumelectric charge[33][33]At first, it was suspected that the strange features of the black hole solutions were pathological artifacts from the symmetry conditions imposed, and that the singularities would not appear in generic situations. This view was held in particular by Vladimir Belinsky, Isaak Khalatnikov, and Evgeny Lifshitz, who tried to prove that no singularities appear in generic solutions. However, in the late 1960s Roger Penrose[34] and Stephen Hawking used global techniques to prove that singularities appear generically.[35]Vladimir BelinskyIsaak KhalatnikovEvgeny LifshitzRoger Penrose[34][34]Stephen Hawking[35][35]Work by James Bardeen, Jacob Bekenstein, Carter, and Hawking in the early 1970s led to the formulation of black hole thermodynamics.[36] These laws describe the behaviour of a black hole in close analogy to the laws of thermodynamics by relating mass to energy, area to entropy, and surface gravity to temperature. The analogy was completed when Hawking, in 1974, showed that quantum field theory predicts that black holes should radiate like a black body with a temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole.[37]James BardeenJacob Bekensteinblack hole thermodynamics[36][36]laws of thermodynamicsentropysurface gravitytemperaturequantum field theoryblack body[37][37]The first use of the term "black hole" in print was by journalist Ann Ewing in her article "'Black Holes' in Space", dated 18 January 1964, which was a report on a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.[38] John Wheeler used the term "black hole" at a lecture in 1967, leading some to credit him with coining the phrase. After Wheeler's use of the term, it was quickly adopted in general use."'Black Holes' in Space"American Association for the Advancement of Science[38][38]John WheelerProperties and structureProperties and structureThe no-hair theorem states that, once it achieves a stable condition after formation, a black hole has only three independent physical properties: mass, charge, and angular momentum.[33] Any two black holes that share the same values for these properties, or parameters, are indistinguishable according to classical (i.e. non-quantum) mechanics.no-hair theoremmasschargeangular momentum[33][33]classicalquantumThese properties are special because they are visible from outside a black hole. For example, a charged black hole repels other like charges just like any other charged object. Similarly, the total mass inside a sphere containing a black hole can be found by using the gravitational analog of Gauss's law, the ADM mass, far away from the black hole.[clarification needed][39] Likewise, the angular momentum can be measured from far away using frame dragging by the gravitomagnetic field.[clarification needed]Gauss's lawADM mass[clarification needed]clarification neededclarification neededclarification needed[39][39]frame dragginggravitomagnetic field[clarification needed]clarification neededclarification neededclarification neededWhen an object falls into a black hole, any information about the shape of the object or distribution of charge on it is evenly distributed along the horizon of the black hole, and is lost to outside observers. The behavior of the horizon in this situation is a dissipative system that is closely analogous to that of a conductive stretchy membrane with friction and electrical resistance—the membrane paradigm.[40] This is different from other field theories such as electromagnetism, which do not have any friction or resistivity at the microscopic level, because they are time-reversible. Because a black hole eventually achieves a stable state with only three parameters, there is no way to avoid losing information about the initial conditions: the gravitational and electric fields of a black hole give very little information about what went in. The information that is lost includes every quantity that cannot be measured far away from the black hole horizon, including approximately conserved quantum numbers such as the total baryon number and lepton number. This behavior is so puzzling that it has been called the black hole information loss paradox.[41][42]informationdissipative systemelectrical resistancemembrane paradigm[40][40]field theoriestime-reversibleapproximately conservedquantum numbersbaryon numberlepton numberblack hole information loss paradox[41][41][42][42]Physical propertiesPhysical properties



A simple illustration of a non-spinning black hole




A simple illustration of a non-spinning black hole


A simple illustration of a non-spinning black holeThe simplest static black holes have mass but neither electric charge nor angular momentum. These black holes are often referred to as Schwarzschild black holes after Karl Schwarzschild who discovered this solution in 1916.[12] According to Birkhoff's theorem, it is the only vacuum solution that is spherically symmetric.[43] This means that there is no observable difference between the gravitational field of such a black hole and that of any other spherical object of the same mass. The popular notion of a black hole "sucking in everything" in its surroundings is therefore only correct near a black hole's horizon; far away, the external gravitational field is identical to that of any other body of the same mass.[44]Schwarzschild black holessolution[12][12]Birkhoff's theoremvacuum solutionspherically symmetric[43][43][44][44]Solutions describing more general black holes also exist. Non-rotating charged black holes are described by the Reissner–Nordström metric, while the Kerr metric describes a non-charged rotating black hole. The most general stationary black hole solution known is the Kerr–Newman metric, which describes a black hole with both charge and angular momentum.[45]charged black holesReissner–Nordström metricKerr metricrotating black holestationaryKerr–Newman metric[45][45]While the mass of a black hole can take any positive value, the charge and angular momentum are constrained by the mass. In Planck units, the total electric charge Q and the total angular momentum J are expected to satisfyPlanck unitsQJ

for a black hole of mass M. Black holes satisfying this inequality are called extremal. Solutions of Einstein's equations that violate this inequality exist, but they do not possess an event horizon. These solutions have so-called naked singularities that can be observed from the outside, and hence are deemed unphysical. The cosmic censorship hypothesis rules out the formation of such singularities, when they are created through the gravitational collapse of realistic matter.[2] This is supported by numerical simulations.[46]Mextremalnaked singularitiesunphysicalcosmic censorship hypothesisrealistic matter[2][2][46][46]Due to the relatively large strength of the electromagnetic force, black holes forming from the collapse of stars are expected to retain the nearly neutral charge of the star. Rotation, however, is expected to be a common feature of compact objects. The black-hole candidate binary X-ray source GRS 1915+105[47] appears to have an angular momentum near the maximum allowed value.electromagnetic forceGRS 1915+105[47][47]
Black hole classifications

Class
Mass
Size


Supermassive black hole
~105–1010 MSun
~0.001–400 AU


Intermediate-mass black hole
~103 MSun
~103 km ≈ REarth


Stellar black hole
~10 MSun
~30 km


Micro black hole
up to ~MMoon
up to ~0.1 mm

Black hole classifications
Class
Mass
Size
ClassMassSize
Supermassive black hole
~105–1010 MSun
~0.001–400 AU
Supermassive black holeSupermassive black hole~105–1010 MSun510MSunMSun~0.001–400 AUAU
Intermediate-mass black hole
~103 MSun
~103 km ≈ REarth
Intermediate-mass black holeIntermediate-mass black hole~103 MSun3MSun~103 km ≈ REarth3REarthREarth
Stellar black hole
~10 MSun
~30 km
Stellar black holeStellar black hole~10 MSunMSun~30 km
Micro black hole
up to ~MMoon
up to ~0.1 mm
Micro black holeMicro black holeup to ~MMoonMMoonMoonup to ~0.1 mmBlack holes are commonly classified according to their mass, independent of angular momentum J or electric charge Q. The size of a black hole, as determined by the radius of the event horizon, or Schwarzschild radius, is roughly proportional to the mass M throughJQSchwarzschild radiusM

where rsh is the Schwarzschild radius and MSun is the mass of the Sun.[48] This relation is exact only for black holes with zero charge and angular momentum; for more general black holes it can differ up to a factor of 2.rshMSunSunmass of the Sun[48][48]Event horizonEvent horizonMain article: Event horizonEvent horizon


Far away from the black hole, a particle can move in any direction, as illustrated by the set of arrows. It is only restricted by the speed of light.



Closer to the black hole, spacetime starts to deform. There are more paths going towards the black hole than paths moving away.[Note 1]



Inside of the event horizon, all paths bring the particle closer to the center of the black hole. It is no longer possible for the particle to escape.



Far away from the black hole, a particle can move in any direction, as illustrated by the set of arrows. It is only restricted by the speed of light.

Far away from the black hole, a particle can move in any direction, as illustrated by the set of arrows. It is only restricted by the speed of light.

Closer to the black hole, spacetime starts to deform. There are more paths going towards the black hole than paths moving away.[Note 1]

Closer to the black hole, spacetime starts to deform. There are more paths going towards the black hole than paths moving away.[Note 1][Note 1][Note 1]

Inside of the event horizon, all paths bring the particle closer to the center of the black hole. It is no longer possible for the particle to escape.

Inside of the event horizon, all paths bring the particle closer to the center of the black hole. It is no longer possible for the particle to escape.The defining feature of a black hole is the appearance of an event horizon—a boundary in spacetime through which matter and light can only pass inward towards the mass of the black hole. Nothing, not even light, can escape from inside the event horizon. The event horizon is referred to as such because if an event occurs within the boundary, information from that event cannot reach an outside observer, making it impossible to determine if such an event occurred.[50]spacetime[50][50]As predicted by general relativity, the presence of a mass deforms spacetime in such a way that the paths taken by particles bend towards the mass.[51] At the event horizon of a black hole, this deformation becomes so strong that there are no paths that lead away from the black hole.[51][51]To a distant observer, clocks near a black hole appear to tick more slowly than those further away from the black hole.[52] Due to this effect, known as gravitational time dilation, an object falling into a black hole appears to slow as it approaches the event horizon, taking an infinite time to reach it.[53] At the same time, all processes on this object slow down, from the view point of a fixed outside observer, causing any light emitted by the object to appear redder and dimmer, an effect known as gravitational redshift.[54] Eventually, the falling object becomes so dim that it can no longer be seen.[52][52]gravitational time dilation[53][53]gravitational redshift[54][54]On the other hand, indestructible observers falling into a black hole do not notice any of these effects as they cross the event horizon. According to their own clocks, which appear to them to tick normally, they cross the event horizon after a finite time without noting any singular behaviour; it is impossible to determine the location of the event horizon from local observations.[55][55][55]The shape of the event horizon of a black hole is always approximately spherical.[Note 2][58] For non-rotating (static) black holes the geometry of the event horizon is precisely spherical, while for rotating black holes the sphere is oblate.[Note 2][Note 2][58][58]SingularitySingularityMain article: Gravitational singularityGravitational singularityAt the center of a black hole, as described by general relativity, lies a gravitational singularity, a region where the spacetime curvature becomes infinite.[59] For a non-rotating black hole, this region takes the shape of a single point and for a rotating black hole, it is smeared out to form a ring singularity that lies in the plane of rotation.[60] In both cases, the singular region has zero volume. It can also be shown that the singular region contains all the mass of the black hole solution.[61] The singular region can thus be thought of as having infinite density.gravitational singularity[59][59]rotating black holering singularity[60][60][61][61]densityObservers falling into a Schwarzschild black hole (i.e., non-rotating and not charged) cannot avoid being carried into the singularity, once they cross the event horizon. They can prolong the experience by accelerating away to slow their descent, but only up to a limit; after attaining a certain ideal velocity, it is best to free fall the rest of the way.[62] When they reach the singularity, they are crushed to infinite density and their mass is added to the total of the black hole. Before that happens, they will have been torn apart by the growing tidal forces in a process sometimes referred to as spaghettification or the "noodle effect".[63]i.e.free fall[62][62]tidal forcesspaghettification[63][63]In the case of a charged (Reissner–Nordström) or rotating (Kerr) black hole, it is possible to avoid the singularity. Extending these solutions as far as possible reveals the hypothetical possibility of exiting the black hole into a different spacetime with the black hole acting as a wormhole.[64] The possibility of traveling to another universe is however only theoretical, since any perturbation would destroy this possibility.[65] It also appears to be possible to follow closed timelike curves (returning to one's own past) around the Kerr singularity, which lead to problems with causality like the grandfather paradox.[66] It is expected that none of these peculiar effects would survive in a proper quantum treatment of rotating and charged black holes.[67]wormhole[64][64][65][65]closed timelike curvescausalitygrandfather paradox[66][66][67][67]The appearance of singularities in general relativity is commonly perceived as signaling the breakdown of the theory.[68] This breakdown, however, is expected; it occurs in a situation where quantum effects should describe these actions, due to the extremely high density and therefore particle interactions. To date, it has not been possible to combine quantum and gravitational effects into a single theory, although there exist attempts to formulate such a theory of quantum gravity. It is generally expected that such a theory will not feature any singularities.[69][70][68][68]quantum effectsquantum gravity[69][69][70][70]Photon spherePhoton sphereMain article: Photon spherePhoton sphereThe photon sphere is a spherical boundary of zero thickness in which photons that move on tangents to that sphere would be trapped in a circular orbit about the black hole. For non-rotating black holes, the photon sphere has a radius 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius. Their orbits would be dynamically unstable, hence any small perturbation, such as a particle of infalling matter, would cause an instability that would grow over time, either setting the photon on an outward trajectory causing it to escape the black hole, or on an inward spiral where it would eventually cross the event horizon.[71]photonstangentsdynamically unstable[71][71]While light can still escape from the photon sphere, any light that crosses the photon sphere on an inbound trajectory will be captured by the black hole. Hence any light that reaches an outside observer from the photon sphere must have been emitted by objects between the photon sphere and the event horizon.[71][71][71]Other compact objects, such as neutron stars, can also have photon spheres.[72] This follows from the fact that the gravitational field external to a spherically-symmetric object is governed by the Schwarzschild metric, which depends only on the object's mass rather than the radius of the object, hence any object whose radius shrinks to smaller than 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius will have a photon sphere.compact objectsneutron stars[72][72]externalSchwarzschild metricErgosphereErgosphereMain article: ErgosphereErgosphere



The ergosphere is an oblate spheroid region outside of the event horizon, where objects cannot remain stationary.




The ergosphere is an oblate spheroid region outside of the event horizon, where objects cannot remain stationary.


The ergosphere is an oblate spheroid region outside of the event horizon, where objects cannot remain stationary.Rotating black holes are surrounded by a region of spacetime in which it is impossible to stand still, called the ergosphere. This is the result of a process known as frame-dragging; general relativity predicts that any rotating mass will tend to slightly "drag" along the spacetime immediately surrounding it. Any object near the rotating mass will tend to start moving in the direction of rotation. For a rotating black hole, this effect is so strong near the event horizon that an object would have to move faster than the speed of light in the opposite direction to just stand still.[73]frame-dragging[73][73]The ergosphere of a black hole is a volume whose inner boundary is the black hole's event horizon and an outer boundary of an oblate spheroid, which coincides with the event horizon at the poles but noticeably wider around the equator. The outer boundary is sometimes called the ergosurface.oblate spheroidergosurfaceObjects and radiation can escape normally from the ergosphere. Through the Penrose process, objects can emerge from the ergosphere with more energy than they entered. This energy is taken from the rotational energy of the black hole causing the latter to slow.[74]Penrose process[74][74]Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)Innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO)Main article: Innermost stable circular orbitInnermost stable circular orbitIn Newtonian gravity, test particles can stably orbit at arbitrary distances from a central object. In general relativity, however, there exists an innermost stable circular orbit (often called the ISCO), inside of which, any infinitesimal perturbations to a circular orbit will lead to inspiral into the black hole.[75] The location of the ISCO depends on the spin of the black hole, in the case of a Schwarzschild black hole (spin zero) is:Newtonian gravitytest particlesgeneral relativity[75][75]

and decreases with increasing spin.Formation and evolutionFormation and evolutionConsidering the exotic nature of black holes, it may be natural[clarification needed] to question if such bizarre objects could exist in nature or to suggest that they are merely pathological solutions to Einstein's equations. Einstein himself wrongly thought that black holes would not form, because he held that the angular momentum of collapsing particles would stabilize their motion at some radius.[76] This led the general relativity community to dismiss all results to the contrary for many years. However, a minority of relativists continued to contend that black holes were physical objects,[77] and by the end of the 1960s, they had persuaded the majority of researchers in the field that there is no obstacle to the formation of an event horizon.[clarification needed]clarification neededclarification neededclarification needed[76][76][77][77]Once an event horizon forms, Penrose proved, a singularity will form within.[34] Shortly afterwards, Hawking showed that many cosmological solutions that describe the Big Bang have singularities without scalar fields or other exotic matter (see "Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems").[clarification needed] The Kerr solution, the no-hair theorem, and the laws of black hole thermodynamics showed that the physical properties of black holes were simple and comprehensible, making them respectable subjects for research.[78] The primary formation process for black holes is expected to be the gravitational collapse of heavy objects such as stars, but there are also more exotic processes that can lead to the production of black holes.[34][34]Big Bangexotic matterPenrose–Hawking singularity theorems[clarification needed]clarification neededclarification neededclarification neededKerr solutionno-hair theoremblack hole thermodynamics[78][78]gravitational collapseGravitational collapseGravitational collapseMain article: Gravitational collapseGravitational collapseGravitational collapse occurs when an object's internal pressure is insufficient to resist the object's own gravity. For stars this usually occurs either because a star has too little "fuel" left to maintain its temperature through stellar nucleosynthesis, or because a star that would have been stable receives extra matter in a way that does not raise its core temperature. In either case the star's temperature is no longer high enough to prevent it from collapsing under its own weight.[79] The collapse may be stopped by the degeneracy pressure of the star's constituents, allowing the condensation of matter into an exotic denser state. The result is one of the various types of compact star. The type of compact star formed depends on the mass of the remnant of the original star left after the outer layers have been blown away. Such explosions, from a supernova explosion or by pulsations, leads to planetary nebula. Note that this mass can be substantially less than the original star. Remnants exceeding 5 M☉ are produced by stars that were over 20 M☉ before the collapse.[79]pressurestellar nucleosynthesis[79][79]degeneracy pressuredenser statecompact starsupernovaplanetary nebulaM☉M☉[79][79]If the mass of the remnant exceeds about 3–4 M☉ (the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit[21]), either because the original star was very heavy or because the remnant collected additional mass through accretion of matter, even the degeneracy pressure of neutrons is insufficient to stop the collapse. No known mechanism (except possibly quark degeneracy pressure, see quark star) is powerful enough to stop the implosion and the object will inevitably collapse to form a black hole.[79]M☉Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit[21][21]neutronsquark star[79][79]The gravitational collapse of heavy stars is assumed to be responsible for the formation of stellar mass black holes. Star formation in the early universe may have resulted in very massive stars, which upon their collapse would have produced black holes of up to 103 M☉. These black holes could be the seeds of the supermassive black holes found in the centers of most galaxies.[80]stellar mass black holesStar formation3M☉[80][80]While most of the energy released during gravitational collapse is emitted very quickly, an outside observer does not actually see the end of this process. Even though the collapse takes a finite amount of time from the reference frame of infalling matter, a distant observer would see the infalling material slow and halt just above the event horizon, due to gravitational time dilation. Light from the collapsing material takes longer and longer to reach the observer, with the light emitted just before the event horizon forms delayed an infinite amount of time. Thus the external observer never sees the formation of the event horizon; instead, the collapsing material seems to become dimmer and increasingly red-shifted, eventually fading away.[81]reference framegravitational time dilation[81][81]Primordial black holes in the Big BangPrimordial black holes in the Big BangGravitational collapse requires great density. In the current epoch of the universe these high densities are only found in stars, but in the early universe shortly after the big bang densities were much greater, possibly allowing for the creation of black holes. The high density alone is not enough to allow the formation of black holes since a uniform mass distribution will not allow the mass to bunch up. In order for primordial black holes to form in such a dense medium, there must be initial density perturbations that can then grow under their own gravity. Different models for the early universe vary widely in their predictions of the size of these perturbations. Various models predict the creation of black holes, ranging from a Planck mass to hundreds of thousands of solar masses.[82] Primordial black holes could thus account for the creation of any type of black hole.[clarification needed]big bangprimordial black holesPlanck mass[82][82][clarification needed]clarification neededclarification neededclarification neededHigh-energy collisionsHigh-energy collisions



A simulated event in the CMS detector, a collision in which a micro black hole may be created.




A simulated event in the CMS detector, a collision in which a micro black hole may be created.


A simulated event in the CMS detector, a collision in which a micro black hole may be created.Gravitational collapse is not the only process that could create black holes. In principle, black holes could be formed in high-energy collisions that achieve sufficient density. As of 2002, no such events have been detected, either directly or indirectly as a deficiency of the mass balance in particle accelerator experiments.[83] This suggests that there must be a lower limit for the mass of black holes. Theoretically, this boundary is expected to lie around the Planck mass (mP = √ħc/G ≈ 7019120000000000000♠1.2×1019 GeV/c2 ≈ 6992220000000000000♠2.2×10−8 kg), where quantum effects are expected to invalidate the predictions of general relativity.[84] This would put the creation of black holes firmly out of reach of any high-energy process occurring on or near the Earth. However, certain developments in quantum gravity suggest that the Planck mass could be much lower: some braneworld scenarios for example put the boundary as low as 7000100000000000000♠1 TeV/c2.[85] This would make it conceivable for micro black holes to be created in the high-energy collisions that occur when cosmic rays hit the Earth's atmosphere, or possibly in the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. These theories are very speculative, and the creation of black holes in these processes is deemed unlikely by many specialists.[86] Even if micro black holes could be formed, it is expected that they would evaporate in about 10−25 seconds, posing no threat to the Earth.[87]high-energyparticle accelerator[83][83]Planck massmP√ħc/Għc/GħcħcGG7019120000000000000♠1.2×1019 GeV/c27019120000000000000♠×19GeV/c2c26992220000000000000♠2.2×10−8 kg6992220000000000000♠×−8[84][84]braneworld7000100000000000000♠1 TeV/c27000100000000000000♠c2[85][85]micro black holescosmic raysLarge Hadron ColliderCERN[86][86]evaporate−25[87][87]GrowthGrowthOnce a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing additional matter. Any black hole will continually absorb gas and interstellar dust from its surroundings and omnipresent cosmic background radiation. This is the primary process through which supermassive black holes seem to have grown.[80] A similar process has been suggested for the formation of intermediate-mass black holes found in globular clusters.[88]interstellar dustcosmic background radiation[80][80]intermediate-mass black holesglobular clusters[88][88]Another possibility for black hole growth, is for a black hole to merge with other objects such as stars or even other black holes. Although not necessary for growth, this is thought to have been important, especially for the early development of supermassive black holes, which could have formed from the coagulation of many smaller objects.[80] The process has also been proposed as the origin of some intermediate-mass black holes.[89][90][80][80]intermediate-mass black holes[89][89][90][90]EvaporationEvaporationMain article: Hawking radiationHawking radiationIn 1974, Hawking predicted that black holes are not entirely black but emit small amounts of thermal radiation;[37] this effect has become known as Hawking radiation. By applying quantum field theory to a static black hole background, he determined that a black hole should emit particles that display a perfect black body spectrum. Since Hawking's publication, many others have verified the result through various approaches.[91] If Hawking's theory of black hole radiation is correct, then black holes are expected to shrink and evaporate over time as they lose mass by the emission of photons and other particles.[37] The temperature of this thermal spectrum (Hawking temperature) is proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, which, for a Schwarzschild black hole, is inversely proportional to the mass. Hence, large black holes emit less radiation than small black holes.[92][37][37]Hawking radiationquantum field theoryblack body spectrum[91][91][37][37]Hawking temperaturesurface gravity[92][92]A stellar black hole of 1 M☉ has a Hawking temperature of about 100 nanokelvins. This is far less than the 2.7 K temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation. Stellar-mass or larger black holes receive more mass from the cosmic microwave background than they emit through Hawking radiation and thus will grow instead of shrink.[citation needed] To have a Hawking temperature larger than 2.7 K (and be able to evaporate), a black hole would need a mass less than the Moon. Such a black hole would have a diameter of less than a tenth of a millimeter.[93]M☉nanokelvinscosmic microwave background[citation needed]citation neededcitation neededcitation neededMoon[93][93]If a black hole is very small, the radiation effects are expected to become very strong. Even a black hole that is heavy compared to a human would evaporate in an instant. A black hole with the mass of a car would have a diameter of about 10−24 m and take a nanosecond to evaporate, during which time it would briefly have a luminosity of more than 200 times that of the Sun. Lower-mass black holes are expected to evaporate even faster; for example, a black hole of mass 1 TeV/c2 would take less than 10−88 seconds to evaporate completely. For such a small black hole, quantum gravitation effects are expected to play an important role and could hypothetically make such a small black hole stable, although current developments in quantum gravity do not indicate so.[94][95]−24c2−88quantum gravitation[94][94][95][95]The Hawking radiation for an astrophysical black hole is predicted to be very weak and would thus be exceedingly difficult to detect from Earth. A possible exception, however, is the burst of gamma rays emitted in the last stage of the evaporation of primordial black holes. Searches for such flashes have proven unsuccessful and provide stringent limits on the possibility of existence of low mass primordial black holes.[96] NASA's Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope launched in 2008 will continue the search for these flashes.[97][96][96]Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope[97][97]Observational evidenceObservational evidence



Gas cloud ripped apart by black hole at the centre of the Milky Way.[98]




Gas cloud ripped apart by black hole at the centre of the Milky Way.[98]


Gas cloud ripped apart by black hole at the centre of the Milky Way.[98]Milky Way[98][98]By their very nature, black holes do not directly emit any electromagnetic radiation other than the hypothetical Hawking radiation, so astrophysicists searching for black holes must generally rely on indirect observations. For example, a black hole's existence can sometimes be inferred by observing its gravitational interactions with its surroundings. However, the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT), run by MIT's Haystack Observatory, is an attempt to directly observe the immediate environment of the event horizon of Sagittarius A*, the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way. The first image of the event horizon may appear as early as 2016.[99] The existence of magnetic fields just outside the event horizon of Sagittarius A*, which were predicted by theoretical studies of black holes, was confirmed by the EHT in 2015.[100][101]Hawking radiationEvent Horizon TelescopeHaystack ObservatorySagittarius A*[99][99][100][100][101][101]Detection of gravitational waves from merging black holesDetection of gravitational waves from merging black holesOn 24 September 2015 the LIGO gravitational wave observatory made the first-ever successful observation of gravitational waves.[6][102] The signal was consistent with theoretical predictions for the gravitational waves produced by the merger of two black holes: one with about 36 solar masses, and the other around 29 solar masses.[6][103] This observation provides the most concrete evidence for the existence of black holes to date. For instance, the gravitational wave signal suggests that the separation of the two object prior to merger was just 350 km (or roughly 4 times the Schwarzschild radius corresponding to the inferred masses). The objects must therefore have been extremely compact, leaving black holes as the most plausible interpretation.[6]LIGOobservation of gravitational waves[6][6][102][102]solar masses[6][6][103][103][6][6]More importantly, the signal observed by LIGO also included the start of the post-merger ringdown, the signal produced as the newly formed compact object settles down to a stationary state. Arguably, the ringdown is the most direct way of observing a black hole.[104] From the LIGO signal it is possible to extract the frequency and damping time of the dominant mode of the ringdown. From these it is possible to infer the mass and angular momentum of the final object, which match independent predictions from numerical simulations of the merger.[105] The frequency and decay time of the dominant mode are determined by the geometry of the photon sphere. Hence, observation of this mode confirms the presence of a photon sphere, however it cannot exclude possible exotic alternatives to black holes that are compact enough to have a photon sphere.[104]ringdown[104][104][105][105][104][104]The observation also provides the first observational evidence for the existence of stellar-mass black hole binaries. Furthermore, it is the first observational evidence of stellar-mass black holes weighing 25 solar masses or more.[106][106][106]Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*Proper motions of stars orbiting Sagittarius A*The proper motions of stars near the center of our own Milky Way provide strong observational evidence that these stars are orbiting a supermassive black hole.[107] Since 1995, astronomers have tracked the motions of 90 stars orbiting an invisible object coincident with the radio source Sagittarius A*. By fitting their motions to Keplerian orbits, the astronomers were able to infer, in 1998, that a 2.6 million M☉ object must be contained in a volume with a radius of 0.02 light-years to cause the motions of those stars.[108] Since then, one of the stars—called S2—has completed a full orbit. From the orbital data, astronomers were able to make refine the calculations of the mass to 4.3 million M☉ and a radius of less than 0.002 lightyears for the object causing the orbital motion of those stars.[107] The upper limit on the object's size is still too large to test whether it is smaller than its Schwarzschild radius; nevertheless, these observations strongly suggest that the central object is a supermassive black hole as there are no other plausible scenarios for confining so much invisible mass into such a small volume.[108] Additionally, there is some observational evidence that this object might possess an event horizon, a feature unique to black holes.[109]proper motionsMilky Way[107][107]Keplerian orbitsM☉M☉light-years[108][108]S2M☉[107][107][108][108][109][109]Accretion of matterAccretion of matterSee also: Accretion discAccretion disc



Black hole with corona, X-ray source (artist's concept).[110]




Black hole with corona, X-ray source (artist's concept).[110]


Black hole with corona, X-ray source (artist's concept).[110][110][110]Due to conservation of angular momentum, gas falling into the gravitational well created by a massive object will typically form a disc-like structure around the object. Artists' impressions such as the accompanying representation of a black hole with corona commonly depict the black hole as if it were a flat-space material body hiding the part of the disc just behind it, but detailed mathematical modelling[111] shows that the image of the disc would actually be distorted by the bending of light that originated behind the black hole in such a way that the upper side of the disc would be entirely visible, while there would be a partially visible secondary image of the underside of the disk.conservation of angular momentumgravitational well[111][111]



Predicted view from outside the horizon of a Schwarzschild black hole lit by a thin accretion disc




Predicted view from outside the horizon of a Schwarzschild black hole lit by a thin accretion disc


Predicted view from outside the horizon of a Schwarzschild black hole lit by a thin accretion discWithin such a disc, friction would cause angular momentum to be transported outward, allowing matter to fall further inward, thus releasing potential energy and increasing the temperature of the gas.[112][112][112]



Blurring of X-rays near Black hole (NuSTAR; 12 August 2014).[110]




Blurring of X-rays near Black hole (NuSTAR; 12 August 2014).[110]


Blurring of X-rays near Black hole (NuSTAR; 12 August 2014).[110]NuSTAR[110][110]When the accreting object is a neutron star or a black hole, the gas in the inner accretion disc orbits at very high speeds because of its proximity to the compact object. The resulting friction is so significant that it heats the inner disc to temperatures at which it emits vast amounts of electromagnetic radiation (mainly X-rays). These bright X-ray sources may be detected by telescopes. This process of accretion is one of the most efficient energy-producing processes known; up to 40% of the rest mass of the accreted material can be emitted as radiation.[112] (In nuclear fusion only about 0.7% of the rest mass will be emitted as energy.) In many cases, accretion discs are accompanied by relativistic jets that are emitted along the poles, which carry away much of the energy. The mechanism for the creation of these jets is currently not well understood.neutron starcompact object[112][112]relativistic jetsAs such, many of the universe's more energetic phenomena have been attributed to the accretion of matter on black holes. In particular, active galactic nuclei and quasars are believed to be the accretion discs of supermassive black holes.[113] Similarly, X-ray binaries are generally accepted to be binary star systems in which one of the two stars is a compact object accreting matter from its companion.[113] It has also been suggested that some ultraluminous X-ray sources may be the accretion disks of intermediate-mass black holes.[114]active galactic nucleiquasars[113][113]binary star[113][113]ultraluminous X-ray sourcesintermediate-mass black holes[114][114]In November 2011 the first direct observation of a quasar accretion disk around a supermassive black hole was reported.[115][116][115][115][116][116]X-ray binariesX-ray binariesSee also: X-ray binaryX-ray binary

Play media


A computer simulation of a star being consumed by a black hole. The blue dot indicates the location of the black hole.


Play media


A computer simulation of a star being consumed by a black hole. The blue dot indicates the location of the black hole.
Play mediaPlay mediaPlay mediaPlay media

A computer simulation of a star being consumed by a black hole. The blue dot indicates the location of the black hole.



A Chandra X-Ray Observatory image of Cygnus X-1, which was the first strong black hole candidate discovered




A Chandra X-Ray Observatory image of Cygnus X-1, which was the first strong black hole candidate discovered


A Chandra X-Ray Observatory image of Cygnus X-1, which was the first strong black hole candidate discoveredChandra X-Ray ObservatoryCygnus X-1X-ray binaries are binary star systems that emit a majority of their radiation in the X-ray part of the spectrum. These X-ray emissions are generally thought to result when one of the stars (compact object) accretes matter from another (regular) star. The presence of an ordinary star in such a system provides a unique opportunity for studying the central object and to determine if it might be a black hole.X-ray binariesbinary starX-ray

Play media


This animation compares the X-ray 'heartbeats' of GRS 1915 and IGR J17091, two black holes that ingest gas from companion stars.


Play media


This animation compares the X-ray 'heartbeats' of GRS 1915 and IGR J17091, two black holes that ingest gas from companion stars.
Play mediaPlay mediaPlay mediaPlay media

This animation compares the X-ray 'heartbeats' of GRS 1915 and IGR J17091, two black holes that ingest gas from companion stars.If such a system emits signals that can be directly traced back to the compact object, it cannot be a black hole. The absence of such a signal does, however, not exclude the possibility that the compact object is a neutron star. By studying the companion star it is often possible to obtain the orbital parameters of the system and to obtain an estimate for the mass of the compact object. If this is much larger than the Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit (that is, the maximum mass a neutron star can have before it collapses) then the object cannot be a neutron star and is generally expected to be a black hole.[113][113][113]The first strong candidate for a black hole, Cygnus X-1, was discovered in this way by Charles Thomas Bolton,[117] Louise Webster and Paul Murdin[118] in 1972.[119][120] Some doubt, however, remained due to the uncertainties that result from the companion star being much heavier than the candidate black hole.[113] Currently, better candidates for black holes are found in a class of X-ray binaries called soft X-ray transients.[113] In this class of system, the companion star is of relatively low mass allowing for more accurate estimates of the black hole mass. Moreover, these systems are actively emit X-rays for only several months once every 10–50 years. During the period of low X-ray emission (called quiescence), the accretion disc is extremely faint allowing detailed observation of the companion star during this period. One of the best such candidates is V404 Cyg.Cygnus X-1Charles Thomas Bolton[117][117][118][118][119][119][120][120][113][113][113][113]V404 CygQuiescence and advection-dominated accretion flowQuiescence and advection-dominated accretion flowThe faintness of the accretion disc of an X-ray binary during quiescence is suspected to be caused by the flow of mass entering a mode called an advection-dominated accretion flow (ADAF). In this mode, almost all the energy generated by friction in the disc is swept along with the flow instead of radiated away. If this model is correct, then it forms strong qualitative evidence for the presence of an event horizon,[121] since if the object at the center of the disc had a solid surface, it would emit large amounts of radiation as the highly energetic gas hits the surface,[clarification needed] an effect that is observed for neutron stars in a similar state.[112]advection-dominated accretion flow[121][121][clarification needed]clarification neededclarification neededclarification needed[112][112]Quasi-periodic oscillationsQuasi-periodic oscillationsMain article: Quasi-periodic oscillationsQuasi-periodic oscillationsThe X-ray emissions from accretion disks sometimes flicker at certain frequencies. These signals are called quasi-periodic oscillations and are thought to be caused by material moving along the inner edge of the accretion disk (the innermost stable circular orbit). As such their frequency is linked to the mass of the compact object. They can thus be used as an alternative way to determine the mass of candidate black holes.[122]quasi-periodic oscillations[122][122]Galactic nucleiGalactic nucleiSee also: Active galactic nucleusActive galactic nucleus



Magnetic waves, called Alfvén S-waves, flow from the base of black hole jets.





Magnetic waves, called Alfvén S-waves, flow from the base of black hole jets.



Magnetic waves, called Alfvén S-waves, flow from the base of black hole jets.
Magnetic waves, called Alfvén S-waves, flow from the base of black hole jets.Alfvén S-wavesAstronomers use the term "active galaxy" to describe galaxies with unusual characteristics, such as unusual spectral line emission and very strong radio emission. Theoretical and observational studies have shown that the activity in these active galactic nuclei (AGN) may be explained by the presence of supermassive black holes, which can be millions of times more massive than stellar ones. The models of these AGN consist of a central black hole that may be millions or billions of times more massive than the Sun; a disk of gas and dust called an accretion disk; and two jets perpendicular to the accretion disk.[123][124]active galaxyspectral linesupermassive black holesSungasdustjets[123][123][124][124]



Detection of unusually bright X-Ray flare from Sagittarius A*, a black hole in the center of the Milky Way galaxy on 5 January 2015.[125]




Detection of unusually bright X-Ray flare from Sagittarius A*, a black hole in the center of the Milky Way galaxy on 5 January 2015.[125]


Detection of unusually bright X-Ray flare from Sagittarius A*, a black hole in the center of the Milky Way galaxy on 5 January 2015.[125]X-RaySagittarius A*Milky Way galaxy[125][125]Although supermassive black holes are expected to be found in most AGN, only some galaxies' nuclei have been more carefully studied in attempts to both identify and measure the actual masses of the central supermassive black hole candidates. Some of the most notable galaxies with supermassive black hole candidates include the Andromeda Galaxy, M32, M87, NGC 3115, NGC 3377, NGC 4258, NGC 4889, NGC 1277, OJ 287, APM 08279+5255 and the Sombrero Galaxy.[126]Andromeda GalaxyM32M87NGC 3115NGC 3377NGC 4258NGC 4889NGC 1277OJ 287APM 08279+5255Sombrero Galaxy[126][126]It is now widely accepted that the center of nearly every galaxy, not just active ones, contains a supermassive black hole.[127] The close observational correlation between the mass of this hole and the velocity dispersion of the host galaxy's bulge, known as the M-sigma relation, strongly suggests a connection between the formation of the black hole and the galaxy itself.[128][127][127]bulgeM-sigma relation[128][128]



Simulation of gas cloud after close approach to the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way.[129]




Simulation of gas cloud after close approach to the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way.[129]


Simulation of gas cloud after close approach to the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way.[129][129][129]Microlensing (proposed)Microlensing (proposed)Another way that the black hole nature of an object may be tested in the future is through observation of effects caused by a strong gravitational field in their vicinity. One such effect is gravitational lensing: The deformation of spacetime around a massive object causes light rays to be deflected much as light passing through an optic lens. Observations have been made of weak gravitational lensing, in which light rays are deflected by only a few arcseconds. However, it has never been directly observed for a black hole.[130] One possibility for observing gravitational lensing by a black hole would be to observe stars in orbit around the black hole. There are several candidates for such an observation in orbit around Sagittarius A*.[130]gravitational lensinglensarcseconds[130][130]Sagittarius A*[130][130]AlternativesAlternativesSee also: Exotic starExotic starThe evidence for stellar black holes strongly relies on the existence of an upper limit for the mass of a neutron star. The size of this limit heavily depends on the assumptions made about the properties of dense matter. New exotic phases of matter could push up this bound.[113] A phase of free quarks at high density might allow the existence of dense quark stars,[131] and some supersymmetric models predict the existence of Q stars.[132] Some extensions of the standard model posit the existence of preons as fundamental building blocks of quarks and leptons, which could hypothetically form preon stars.[133] These hypothetical models could potentially explain a number of observations of stellar black hole candidates. However, it can be shown from arguments in general relativity that any such object will have a maximum mass.[113]phases of matter[113][113]quarksquark stars[131][131]supersymmetricQ stars[132][132]standard modelpreonsleptonspreon stars[133][133][113][113]Since the average density of a black hole inside its Schwarzschild radius is inversely proportional to the square of its mass, supermassive black holes are much less dense than stellar black holes (the average density of a 108 M☉ black hole is comparable to that of water).[113] Consequently, the physics of matter forming a supermassive black hole is much better understood and the possible alternative explanations for supermassive black hole observations are much more mundane. For example, a supermassive black hole could be modelled by a large cluster of very dark objects. However, such alternatives are typically not stable enough to explain the supermassive black hole candidates.[113]8M☉[113][113][113][113]The evidence for the existence of stellar and supermassive black holes implies that in order for black holes to not form, general relativity must fail as a theory of gravity, perhaps due to the onset of quantum mechanical corrections. A much anticipated feature of a theory of quantum gravity is that it will not feature singularities or event horizons and thus black holes would not be real artifacts.[134] In 2002,[135] much attention has been drawn by the fuzzball model in string theory. Based on calculations for specific situations in string theory, the proposal suggests that generically the individual states of a black hole solution do not have an event horizon or singularity, but that for a classical/semi-classical observer the statistical average of such states appears just as an ordinary black hole as deduced from general relativity.[136]quantum mechanical[134][134][135][135]fuzzballstring theory[136][136]Open questionsOpen questionsEntropy and thermodynamicsEntropy and thermodynamicsFurther information: Black hole thermodynamicsBlack hole thermodynamics



The formula for the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy (S) of a black hole, which depends on the area of the black hole (A). The constants are the speed of light (c), the Boltzmann constant (k), Newton's constant (G), and the reduced Planck constant (ħ).




The formula for the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy (S) of a black hole, which depends on the area of the black hole (A). The constants are the speed of light (c), the Boltzmann constant (k), Newton's constant (G), and the reduced Planck constant (ħ).


The formula for the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy (S) of a black hole, which depends on the area of the black hole (A). The constants are the speed of light (c), the Boltzmann constant (k), Newton's constant (G), and the reduced Planck constant (ħ).speed of lightBoltzmann constantNewton's constantreduced Planck constantIn 1971, Hawking showed under general conditions[Note 3] that the total area of the event horizons of any collection of classical black holes can never decrease, even if they collide and merge.[137] This result, now known as the second law of black hole mechanics, is remarkably similar to the second law of thermodynamics, which states that the total entropy of a system can never decrease. As with classical objects at absolute zero temperature, it was assumed that black holes had zero entropy. If this were the case, the second law of thermodynamics would be violated by entropy-laden matter entering a black hole, resulting in a decrease of the total entropy of the universe. Therefore, Bekenstein proposed that a black hole should have an entropy, and that it should be proportional to its horizon area.[138][Note 3][Note 3][137][137]second law of black hole mechanicssecond law of thermodynamicsentropyabsolute zero[138][138]The link with the laws of thermodynamics was further strengthened by Hawking's discovery that quantum field theory predicts that a black hole radiates blackbody radiation at a constant temperature. This seemingly causes a violation of the second law of black hole mechanics, since the radiation will carry away energy from the black hole causing it to shrink. The radiation, however also carries away entropy, and it can be proven under general assumptions that the sum of the entropy of the matter surrounding a black hole and one quarter of the area of the horizon as measured in Planck units is in fact always increasing. This allows the formulation of the first law of black hole mechanics as an analogue of the first law of thermodynamics, with the mass acting as energy, the surface gravity as temperature and the area as entropy.[138]quantum field theoryblackbody radiationPlanck unitsfirst law of black hole mechanicsfirst law of thermodynamics[138][138]One puzzling feature is that the entropy of a black hole scales with its area rather than with its volume, since entropy is normally an extensive quantity that scales linearly with the volume of the system. This odd property led Gerard 't Hooft and Leonard Susskind to propose the holographic principle, which suggests that anything that happens in a volume of spacetime can be described by data on the boundary of that volume.[139]extensive quantityGerard 't HooftLeonard Susskindholographic principle[139][139]Although general relativity can be used to perform a semi-classical calculation of black hole entropy, this situation is theoretically unsatisfying. In statistical mechanics, entropy is understood as counting the number of microscopic configurations of a system that have the same macroscopic qualities (such as mass, charge, pressure, etc.). Without a satisfactory theory of quantum gravity, one cannot perform such a computation for black holes. Some progress has been made in various approaches to quantum gravity. In 1995, Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa showed that counting the microstates of a specific supersymmetric black hole in string theory reproduced the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy.[140] Since then, similar results have been reported for different black holes both in string theory and in other approaches to quantum gravity like loop quantum gravity.[141]statistical mechanicsmasschargepressurequantum gravityAndrew StromingerCumrun Vafasupersymmetricstring theory[140][140]loop quantum gravity[141][141]Information loss paradoxInformation loss paradoxMain article: Black hole information paradoxBlack hole information paradox


Unsolved problem in physics:
Is physical information lost in black holes?
(more unsolved problems in physics)




Unsolved problem in physics:
Is physical information lost in black holes?
(more unsolved problems in physics)

Unsolved problem in physics:
Is physical information lost in black holes?
(more unsolved problems in physics)
Unsolved problem in physicsIs physical information lost in black holes?
(more unsolved problems in physics)Is physical information lost in black holes?physical information(more unsolved problems in physics)(more unsolved problems in physics)Because a black hole has only a few internal parameters, most of the information about the matter that went into forming the black hole is lost. Regardless of the type of matter which goes into a black hole, it appears that only information concerning the total mass, charge, and angular momentum are conserved. As long as black holes were thought to persist forever this information loss is not that problematic, as the information can be thought of as existing inside the black hole, inaccessible from the outside. However, black holes slowly evaporate by emitting Hawking radiation. This radiation does not appear to carry any additional information about the matter that formed the black hole, meaning that this information appears to be gone forever.[142]Hawking radiation[142][142]The question whether information is truly lost in black holes (the black hole information paradox) has divided the theoretical physics community (see Thorne–Hawking–Preskill bet). In quantum mechanics, loss of information corresponds to the violation of vital property called unitarity, which has to do with the conservation of probability. It has been argued that loss of unitarity would also imply violation of conservation of energy.[143] Over recent years evidence has been building that indeed information and unitarity are preserved in a full quantum gravitational treatment of the problem.[144]black hole information paradoxThorne–Hawking–Preskill betunitarity[143][143][144][144]See alsoSee also



Cosmology portal



Star portal



Astronomy portal





Cosmology portal



Star portal



Astronomy portal



Cosmology portal
Cosmology portalCosmology portal

Star portal
Star portalStar portal

Astronomy portal
Astronomy portalAstronomy portal

List of nearest black holes
Black brane
Black hole complementarity
Black hole starship
Black holes in fiction
Black string
BTZ black hole
Dumb hole
General relativity
Kugelblitz (astrophysics)
List of black holes
Susskind-Hawking battle
Timeline of black hole physics
White hole
Wormhole


List of nearest black holes
Black brane
Black hole complementarity
Black hole starship
Black holes in fiction
Black string
BTZ black hole
Dumb hole
General relativity
Kugelblitz (astrophysics)
List of black holes
Susskind-Hawking battle
Timeline of black hole physics
White hole
Wormhole
List of nearest black holesList of nearest black holesBlack braneBlack braneBlack hole complementarityBlack hole complementarityBlack hole starshipBlack hole starshipBlack holes in fictionBlack holes in fictionBlack stringBlack stringBTZ black holeBTZ black holeDumb holeDumb holeGeneral relativityGeneral relativityKugelblitz (astrophysics)Kugelblitz (astrophysics)List of black holesList of black holesSusskind-Hawking battleSusskind-Hawking battleTimeline of black hole physicsTimeline of black hole physicsWhite holeWhite holeWormholeWormholeNotesNotes
^ The set of possible paths, or more accurately the future light cone containing all possible world lines (in this diagram the light cone is represented by the V-shaped region bounded by arrows representing light ray world lines), is tilted in this way in Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates (the diagram is a "cartoon" version of an Eddington–Finkelstein coordinate diagram), but in other coordinates the light cones are not tilted in this way, for example in Schwarzschild coordinates they simply narrow without tilting as one approaches the event horizon, and in Kruskal–Szekeres coordinates the light cones don't change shape or orientation at all.[49]
^ This is true only for 4-dimensional spacetimes. In higher dimensions more complicated horizon topologies like a black ring are possible.[56][57]
^ In particular, he assumed that all matter satisfies the weak energy condition.
^ The set of possible paths, or more accurately the future light cone containing all possible world lines (in this diagram the light cone is represented by the V-shaped region bounded by arrows representing light ray world lines), is tilted in this way in Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates (the diagram is a "cartoon" version of an Eddington–Finkelstein coordinate diagram), but in other coordinates the light cones are not tilted in this way, for example in Schwarzschild coordinates they simply narrow without tilting as one approaches the event horizon, and in Kruskal–Szekeres coordinates the light cones don't change shape or orientation at all.[49]^^^The set of possible paths, or more accurately the future light cone containing all possible world lines (in this diagram the light cone is represented by the V-shaped region bounded by arrows representing light ray world lines), is tilted in this way in Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates (the diagram is a "cartoon" version of an Eddington–Finkelstein coordinate diagram), but in other coordinates the light cones are not tilted in this way, for example in Schwarzschild coordinates they simply narrow without tilting as one approaches the event horizon, and in Kruskal–Szekeres coordinates the light cones don't change shape or orientation at all.[49]light coneworld linesEddington–Finkelstein coordinatesSchwarzschild coordinatesKruskal–Szekeres coordinates[49][49]^ This is true only for 4-dimensional spacetimes. In higher dimensions more complicated horizon topologies like a black ring are possible.[56][57]^^^This is true only for 4-dimensional spacetimes. In higher dimensions more complicated horizon topologies like a black ring are possible.[56][57]black ring[56][56][57][57]^ In particular, he assumed that all matter satisfies the weak energy condition.^^^In particular, he assumed that all matter satisfies the weak energy condition.weak energy conditionReferencesReferences

^ Wald 1984, pp. 299–300
^ a b Wald, R. M. (1997). "Gravitational Collapse and Cosmic Censorship". arXiv:gr-qc/9710068 [gr-qc]. 
^ Overbye, Dennis (8 June 2015). "Black Hole Hunters". NASA. Retrieved 8 June 2015. 
^ Schutz, Bernard F. (2003). Gravity from the ground up. Cambridge University Press. p. 110. ISBN 0-521-45506-5. 
^ Davies, P. C. W. (1978). "Thermodynamics of Black Holes" (PDF). Reports on Progress in Physics 41 (8): 1313–1355. Bibcode:1978RPPh...41.1313D. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/41/8/004. 
^ a b c d Abbott, B.P.; et al. (2016). "Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger". Phys. Rev. Lett. 116: 061102. arXiv:1602.03837. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102. 
^ O. Straub, F.H. Vincent, M.A. Abramowicz, E. Gourgoulhon, T. Paumard, ``Modelling the black hole silhouette in Sgr A* with ion tori,Astron. Astroph 543 (2012) A8
^ Michell, J. (1784). "On the Means of Discovering the Distance, Magnitude, &c. of the Fixed Stars, in Consequence of the Diminution of the Velocity of Their Light, in Case Such a Diminution Should be Found to Take Place in any of Them, and Such Other Data Should be Procured from Observations, as Would be Farther Necessary for That Purpose". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 74 (0): 35–57. Bibcode:1784RSPT...74...35M. doi:10.1098/rstl.1784.0008. JSTOR 106576. 
^ Gillispie, C. C. (2000). Pierre-Simon Laplace, 1749–1827: a life in exact science. Princeton paperbacks. Princeton University Press. p. 175. ISBN 0-691-05027-9. 
^ Israel, W. (1989). "Dark stars: the evolution of an idea". In Hawking, S. W.; Israel, W. 300 Years of Gravitation. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-37976-2. 
^ Thorne 1994, pp. 123–124
^ a b Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Massenpunktes nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 7: 189–196.  and Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Kugel aus inkompressibler Flüssigkeit nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 18: 424–434. 
^ Droste, J. (1917). "On the field of a single centre in Einstein's theory of gravitation, and the motion of a particle in that field" (PDF). Proceedings Royal Academy Amsterdam 19 (1): 197–215. 
^ Kox, A. J. (1992). "General Relativity in the Netherlands: 1915–1920". In Eisenstaedt, J.; Kox, A. J. Studies in the history of general relativity. Birkhäuser. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-8176-3479-7. [dead link]
^ 't Hooft, G. (2009). "Introduction to the Theory of Black Holes" (PDF). Institute for Theoretical Physics / Spinoza Institute: 47–48. 
^ Eddington, Arthur (1926). The Internal Constitution of the Stars. Cambridge University Press. p. 6. 
^ Kip Thorne comments on this quote on pages 134-135 of his book Black Holes and Time Warps, writing that "The first conclusion was the Newtonian version of light not escaping; the second was a semi-accurate, relativistic description; and the third was typical Eddingtonian hyperbole ... when a star is as small as the critical circumference, the curvature is strong but not infinite, and space is definitely not wrapped around the star. Eddington may have known this, but his description made a good story, and it captured in a whimsical way the spirit of Schwarzschild's spacetime curvature."
^ Venkataraman, G. (1992). Chandrasekhar and his limit. Universities Press. p. 89. ISBN 81-7371-035-X. 
^ Detweiler, S. (1981). "Resource letter BH-1: Black holes". American Journal of Physics 49 (5): 394–400. Bibcode:1981AmJPh..49..394D. doi:10.1119/1.12686. 
^ Harpaz, A. (1994). Stellar evolution. A K Peters. p. 105. ISBN 1-56881-012-1. 
^ a b Oppenheimer, J. R.; Volkoff, G. M. (1939). "On Massive Neutron Cores". Physical Review 55 (4): 374–381. Bibcode:1939PhRv...55..374O. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.55.374. 
^ Ruffini, R.; Wheeler, J. A. (1971). "Introducing the black hole" (PDF). Physics Today 24 (1): 30–41. Bibcode:1971PhT....24a..30R. doi:10.1063/1.3022513. 
^ Finkelstein, D. (1958). "Past-Future Asymmetry of the Gravitational Field of a Point Particle". Physical Review 110 (4): 965–967. Bibcode:1958PhRv..110..965F. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.110.965. 
^ Kruskal, M. (1960). "Maximal Extension of Schwarzschild Metric". Physical Review 119 (5): 1743. Bibcode:1960PhRv..119.1743K. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.119.1743. 
^ Hewish, A.; et al. (1968). "Observation of a Rapidly Pulsating Radio Source". Nature 217 (5130): 709–713. Bibcode:1968Natur.217..709H. doi:10.1038/217709a0 
^ Pilkington, J. D. H.; et al. (1968). "Observations of some further Pulsed Radio Sources". Nature 218 (5137): 126–129. Bibcode:1968Natur.218..126P. doi:10.1038/218126a0 
^ Hewish, A. (1970). "Pulsars". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 8 (1): 265–296. Bibcode:1970ARA&A...8..265H. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.08.090170.001405. 
^ Newman, E. T.; et al. (1965). "Metric of a Rotating, Charged Mass". Journal of Mathematical Physics 6 (6): 918. Bibcode:1965JMP.....6..918N. doi:10.1063/1.1704351 
^ Israel, W. (1967). "Event Horizons in Static Vacuum Space-Times". Physical Review 164 (5): 1776. Bibcode:1967PhRv..164.1776I. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.164.1776. 
^ Carter, B. (1971). "Axisymmetric Black Hole Has Only Two Degrees of Freedom". Physical Review Letters 26 (6): 331. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26..331C. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.331. 
^ Carter, B. (1977). "The vacuum black hole uniqueness theorem and its conceivable generalisations". Proceedings of the 1st Marcel Grossmann meeting on general relativity. pp. 243–254. 
^ Robinson, D. (1975). "Uniqueness of the Kerr Black Hole". Physical Review Letters 34 (14): 905. Bibcode:1975PhRvL..34..905R. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.34.905. 
^ a b Heusler, M. (1998). "Stationary Black Holes: Uniqueness and Beyond". Living Reviews in Relativity 1 (6). doi:10.12942/lrr-1998-6. Archived from the original on 1999-02-03. Retrieved 2011-02-08. 
^ a b Penrose, R. (1965). "Gravitational Collapse and Space-Time Singularities". Physical Review Letters 14 (3): 57. Bibcode:1965PhRvL..14...57P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.14.57. 
^ Ford, L. H. (2003). "The Classical Singularity Theorems and Their Quantum Loopholes". International Journal of Theoretical Physics 42 (6): 1219. doi:10.1023/A:1025754515197. 
^ Bardeen, J. M.; Carter, B.; Hawking, S. W. (1973). "The four laws of black hole mechanics". Communications in Mathematical Physics 31 (2): 161–170. Bibcode:1973CMaPh..31..161B. doi:10.1007/BF01645742. MR MR0334798. Zbl 1125.83309. 
^ a b c Hawking, S. W. (1974). "Black hole explosions?". Nature 248 (5443): 30–31. Bibcode:1974Natur.248...30H. doi:10.1038/248030a0. 
^ Quinion, M. (26 April 2008). "Black Hole". World Wide Words. Retrieved 2008-06-17. 
^ Carroll 2004, p. 253
^ Thorne, K. S.; Price, R. H. (1986). Black holes: the membrane paradigm. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-03770-8. 
^ Anderson, Warren G. (1996). "The Black Hole Information Loss Problem". Usenet Physics FAQ. Retrieved 2009-03-24. 
^ Preskill, J. (1994-10-21). Black holes and information: A crisis in quantum physics (PDF). Caltech Theory Seminar. 
^ Hawking & Ellis 1973, Appendix B
^ Seeds, Michael A.; Backman, Dana E. (2007). Perspectives on Astronomy. Cengage Learning. p. 167. ISBN 0-495-11352-2 
^ Shapiro, S. L.; Teukolsky, S. A. (1983). Black holes, white dwarfs, and neutron stars: the physics of compact objects. John Wiley and Sons. p. 357. ISBN 0-471-87316-0. 
^ Berger, B. K. (2002). "Numerical Approaches to Spacetime Singularities". Living Reviews in Relativity 5: 1. arXiv:gr-qc/0201056. Bibcode:2002LRR.....5....1B. doi:10.12942/lrr-2002-1. Retrieved 2007-08-04. 
^ McClintock, J. E.; Shafee, R.; Narayan, R.; Remillard, R. A.; Davis, S. W.; Li, L.-X. (2006). "The Spin of the Near-Extreme Kerr Black Hole GRS 1915+105". Astrophysical Journal 652 (1): 518–539. arXiv:astro-ph/0606076. Bibcode:2006ApJ...652..518M. doi:10.1086/508457. 
^ Wald 1984, pp. 124–125
^ Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973, p. 848
^ Wheeler 2007, p. 179
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 5.4 and 7.3
^ Carroll 2004, p. 217
^ Carroll 2004, p. 218
^ "Inside a black hole". Knowing the universe and its secrets. Retrieved 2009-03-26. 
^ Carroll 2004, p. 222
^ Emparan, R.; Reall, H. S. (2008). "Black Holes in Higher Dimensions". Living Reviews in Relativity 11 (6). arXiv:0801.3471. Bibcode:2008LRR....11....6E. doi:10.12942/lrr-2008-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10. 
^ Obers, N. A. (2009). Papantonopoulos, Eleftherios, ed. "Black Holes in Higher-Dimensional Gravity". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 211–258. arXiv:0802.0519. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0. 
^ hawking & ellis 1973, Ch. 9.3
^ Carroll 2004, p. 205
^ Carroll 2004, pp. 264–265
^ Carroll 2004, p. 252
^ Lewis, G. F.; Kwan, J. (2007). "No Way Back: Maximizing Survival Time Below the Schwarzschild Event Horizon". Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 24 (2): 46–52. arXiv:0705.1029. Bibcode:2007PASA...24...46L. doi:10.1071/AS07012. 
^ Wheeler 2007, p. 182
^ Carroll 2004, pp. 257–259 and 265–266
^ Droz, S.; Israel, W.; Morsink, S. M. (1996). "Black holes: the inside story". Physics World 9 (1): 34–37. Bibcode:1996PhyW....9...34D. 
^ Carroll 2004, p. 266
^ Poisson, E.; Israel, W. (1990). "Internal structure of black holes". Physical Review D 41 (6): 1796. Bibcode:1990PhRvD..41.1796P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.41.1796. 
^ Wald 1984, p. 212
^ Hamade, R. (1996). "Black Holes and Quantum Gravity". Cambridge Relativity and Cosmology. University of Cambridge. Retrieved 2009-03-26. 
^ Palmer, D. "Ask an Astrophysicist: Quantum Gravity and Black Holes". NASA. Retrieved 2009-03-26. 
^ a b Nitta, Daisuke; Chiba, Takeshi; Sugiyama, Naoshi (September 2011). "Shadows of colliding black holes". Physical Review D 84 (6). arXiv:1106.2425. Bibcode:2011PhRvD..84f3008N. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.84.063008 
^ Nemiroff, R. J. (1993). "Visual distortions near a neutron star and black hole". American Journal of Physics 61 (7): 619. arXiv:astro-ph/9312003. Bibcode:1993AmJPh..61..619N. doi:10.1119/1.17224. 
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.6
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.7
^ Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973
^ Einstein, A. (1939). "On A Stationary System With Spherical Symmetry Consisting of Many Gravitating Masses". Annals of Mathematics 40 (4): 922–936. doi:10.2307/1968902. JSTOR 1968902. 
^ Kerr, R. P. (2009). "The Kerr and Kerr-Schild metrics". In Wiltshire, D. L.; Visser, M.; Scott, S. M. The Kerr Spacetime. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:0706.1109. ISBN 978-0-521-88512-6. 
^ Hawking, S. W.; Penrose, R. (January 1970). "The Singularities of Gravitational Collapse and Cosmology". Proceedings of the Royal Society A 314 (1519): 529–548. Bibcode:1970RSPSA.314..529H. doi:10.1098/rspa.1970.0021. JSTOR 2416467. 
^ a b c Carroll 2004, Section 5.8
^ a b c Rees, M. J.; Volonteri, M. (2007). "Massive black holes: formation and evolution". In Karas, V.; Matt, G. Black Holes from Stars to Galaxies—Across the Range of Masses. Cambridge University Press. pp. 51–58. arXiv:astro-ph/0701512. ISBN 978-0-521-86347-6. 
^ Penrose, R. (2002). "Gravitational Collapse: The Role of General Relativity" (PDF). General Relativity and Gravitation 34 (7): 1141. Bibcode:2002GReGr..34.1141P. doi:10.1023/A:1016578408204. 
^ Carr, B. J. (2005). "Primordial Black Holes: Do They Exist and Are They Useful?". In Suzuki, H.; Yokoyama, J.; Suto, Y.; Sato, K. Inflating Horizon of Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology. Universal Academy Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0511743. ISBN 4-946443-94-0. 
^ Giddings, S. B.; Thomas, S. (2002). "High energy colliders as black hole factories: The end of short distance physics". Physical Review D 65 (5): 056010. arXiv:hep-ph/0106219. Bibcode:2002PhRvD..65e6010G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.65.056010. 
^ Harada, T. (2006). "Is there a black hole minimum mass?". Physical Review D 74 (8): 084004. arXiv:gr-qc/0609055. Bibcode:2006PhRvD..74h4004H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.74.084004. 
^ Arkani–Hamed, N.; Dimopoulos, S.; Dvali, G. (1998). "The hierarchy problem and new dimensions at a millimeter". Physics Letters B 429 (3–4): 263. arXiv:hep-ph/9803315. Bibcode:1998PhLB..429..263A. doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(98)00466-3. 
^ LHC Safety Assessment Group. "Review of the Safety of LHC Collisions" (PDF). CERN. 
^ Cavaglià, M. (2010). "Particle accelerators as black hole factories?". Einstein-Online (Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute)) 4: 1010. 
^ Vesperini, E.; McMillan, S. L. W.; d'Ercole, A.; et al. (2010). "Intermediate-Mass Black Holes in Early Globular Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 713 (1): L41–L44. arXiv:1003.3470. Bibcode:2010ApJ...713L..41V. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/713/1/L41. 
^ Zwart, S. F. P.; Baumgardt, H.; Hut, P.; et al. (2004). "Formation of massive black holes through runaway collisions in dense young star clusters". Nature 428 (6984): 724–6. arXiv:astro-ph/0402622. Bibcode:2004Natur.428..724P. doi:10.1038/nature02448. PMID 15085124. 
^ O'Leary, R. M.; Rasio, F. A.; Fregeau, J. M.; et al. (2006). "Binary Mergers and Growth of Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal 637 (2): 937. arXiv:astro-ph/0508224. Bibcode:2006ApJ...637..937O. doi:10.1086/498446. 
^ Page, D. N. (2005). "Hawking radiation and black hole thermodynamics". New Journal of Physics 7: 203. arXiv:hep-th/0409024. Bibcode:2005NJPh....7..203P. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/7/1/203. 
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 9.6
^ "Evaporating black holes?". Einstein online. Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics. 2010. Retrieved 2010-12-12. 
^ Giddings, S. B.; Mangano, M. L. (2008). "Astrophysical implications of hypothetical stable TeV-scale black holes". Physical Review D 78 (3): 035009. arXiv:0806.3381. Bibcode:2008PhRvD..78c5009G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.78.035009. 
^ Peskin, M. E. (2008). "The end of the world at the Large Hadron Collider?". Physics 1: 14. Bibcode:2008PhyOJ...1...14P. doi:10.1103/Physics.1.14. 
^ Fichtel, C. E.; Bertsch, D. L.; Dingus, B. L.; et al. (1994). "Search of the energetic gamma-ray experiment telescope (EGRET) data for high-energy gamma-ray microsecond bursts". Astrophysical Journal 434 (2): 557–559. Bibcode:1994ApJ...434..557F. doi:10.1086/174758. 
^ Naeye, R. "Testing Fundamental Physics". NASA. Retrieved 2008-09-16. 
^ "Ripped Apart by a Black Hole". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 19 July 2013. 
^ O'Neill, Ian (2 July 2015). "Event Horizon Telescope Will Probe Spacetime's Mysteries". Discovery News. Retrieved 6 December 2015. 
^ Johnson, M. D.; Fish, V. L.; Doeleman, S. S.; Marrone, D. P.; Plambeck, R. L.; Wardle, J. F. C.; Akiyama, K.; Asada, K.; Beaudoin, C. (2015-12-04). "Resolved magnetic-field structure and variability near the event horizon of Sagittarius A*". Science 350 (6265): 1242–1245. arXiv:1512.01220. Bibcode:2015Sci...350.1242J. doi:10.1126/science.aac7087. ISSN 0036-8075. 
^ "Event Horizon Telescope Reveals Magnetic Fields at Milky Way's Central Black Hole". cfa.harvard.edu. 3 December 2015. Retrieved 12 January 2016. 
^ Overbye, Dennis (11 February 2016). "Physicists Detect Gravitational Waves, Proving Einstein Right". New York Times. Retrieved 11 February 2016. 
^ Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Properties of the binary black hole merger GW150914". arXiv:1602.03840. 
^ a b Cardoso, V., Franzin, E., and Pani, P. (2016). "Is the gravitational-wave ringdown a probe of the event horizon?". Physical Review Letters. arXiv:1602.07309. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Tests of general relativity with GW150914". LIGO. Retrieved 12 February 2016. 
^ "Astrophysical Implications of the Binary Black Hole Merger GW150914". Astrophys. J. Lett. 818 (2): L22. arXiv:1602.03846. Bibcode:2016ApJ...818L..22A. doi:10.3847/2041-8205/818/2/L22. 
^ a b Gillessen, S.; Eisenhauer, F.; Trippe, S.; et al. (2009). "Monitoring Stellar Orbits around the Massive Black Hole in the Galactic Center". The Astrophysical Journal 692 (2): 1075. arXiv:0810.4674. Bibcode:2009ApJ...692.1075G. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/692/2/1075. 
^ a b Ghez, A. M.; Klein, B. L.; Morris, M.; et al. (1998). "High Proper‐Motion Stars in the Vicinity of Sagittarius A*: Evidence for a Supermassive Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy". The Astrophysical Journal 509 (2): 678. arXiv:astro-ph/9807210. Bibcode:1998ApJ...509..678G. doi:10.1086/306528. 
^ Broderick, Avery; Loeb, Abraham; Narayan, Ramesh (August 2009). "The Event Horizon of Sagittarius A*". The Astrophysical Journal 701: 1357. arXiv:0903.1105. Bibcode:2009ApJ...701.1357B. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/701/2/1357. 
^ a b "NASA's NuSTAR Sees Rare Blurring of Black Hole Light". NASA. 12 August 2014. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Short-cut method of solution of geodesic equations for Schwarzchild black hole", J.A. Marck, Class.Quant. Grav. 13 (1996) 393-402.
^ a b c McClintock, J. E.; Remillard, R. A. (2006). "Black Hole Binaries". In Lewin, W.; van der Klis, M. Compact Stellar X-ray Sources. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0306213. ISBN 0-521-82659-4.  section 4.1.5.
^ a b c d e f g h i Celotti, A.; Miller, J. C.; Sciama, D. W. (1999). "Astrophysical evidence for the existence of black holes". Classical and Quantum Gravity 16 (12A): A3–A21. arXiv:astro-ph/9912186. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/16/12A/301. 
^ Winter, L. M.; Mushotzky, R. F.; Reynolds, C. S. (2006). "XMM‐Newton Archival Study of the Ultraluminous X‐Ray Population in Nearby Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal 649 (2): 730. arXiv:astro-ph/0512480. Bibcode:2006ApJ...649..730W. doi:10.1086/506579. 
^ information@eso.org. "Hubble directly observes the disc around a black hole". www.spacetelescope.org. Retrieved 2016-03-07. 
^ Muñoz, José A.; Mediavilla, Evencio; Kochanek, Christopher S.; Falco, Emilio; Mosquera, Ana María (2011-12-01). "A Study of Gravitational Lens Chromaticity with the Hubble Space Telescope". The Astrophysical Journal 742 (2): 67. arXiv:1107.5932. Bibcode:2011ApJ...742...67M. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/742/2/67. ISSN 0004-637X. 
^ Bolton, C. T. (1972). "Identification of Cygnus X-1 with HDE 226868". Nature 235 (5336): 271–273. Bibcode:1972Natur.235..271B. doi:10.1038/235271b0. 
^ Webster, B. L.; Murdin, P. (1972). "Cygnus X-1—a Spectroscopic Binary with a Heavy Companion ?". Nature 235 (5332): 37–38. Bibcode:1972Natur.235...37W. doi:10.1038/235037a0. 
^ Rolston, B. (10 November 1997). "The First Black Hole". The bulletin. University of Toronto. Archived from the original on 2008-05-02. Retrieved 2008-03-11. 
^ Shipman, H. L.; Yu, Z; Du, Y.W (1 January 1975). "The implausible history of triple star models for Cygnus X-1 Evidence for a black hole". Astrophysical Letters 16 (1): 9–12. Bibcode:1975ApL....16....9S. doi:10.1016/S0304-8853(99)00384-4. 
^ Narayan, R.; McClintock, J. (2008). "Advection-dominated accretion and the black hole event horizon". New Astronomy Reviews 51 (10–12): 733. arXiv:0803.0322. Bibcode:2008NewAR..51..733N. doi:10.1016/j.newar.2008.03.002. 
^ "NASA scientists identify smallest known black hole" (Press release). Goddard Space Flight Center. 2008-04-01. Retrieved 2009-03-14. 
^ Krolik, J. H. (1999). Active Galactic Nuclei. Princeton University Press. Ch. 1.2. ISBN 0-691-01151-6. 
^ Sparke, L. S.; Gallagher, J. S. (2000). Galaxies in the Universe: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press. Ch. 9.1. ISBN 0-521-59740-4. 
^ Chou, Felicia; Anderson, Janet; Watzke, Megan (5 January 2015). "RELEASE 15-001 - NASA’s Chandra Detects Record-Breaking Outburst from Milky Way’s Black Hole". NASA. Retrieved 6 January 2015. 
^ Kormendy, J.; Richstone, D. (1995). "Inward Bound—The Search For Supermassive Black Holes In Galactic Nuclei". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 33 (1): 581–624. Bibcode:1995ARA&A..33..581K. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.33.090195.003053. 
^ King, A. (2003). "Black Holes, Galaxy Formation, and the MBH-σ Relation". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 596 (1): 27–29. arXiv:astro-ph/0308342. Bibcode:2003ApJ...596L..27K. doi:10.1086/379143. 
^ Ferrarese, L.; Merritt, D. (2000). "A Fundamental Relation Between Supermassive Black Holes and their Host Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 539 (1): 9–12. arXiv:astro-ph/0006053. Bibcode:2000ApJ...539L...9F. doi:10.1086/312838. 
^ "A Black Hole's Dinner is Fast Approaching". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 6 February 2012. 
^ a b Bozza, V. (2010). "Gravitational Lensing by Black Holes". General Relativity and Gravitation 42 (42): 2269–2300. arXiv:0911.2187. Bibcode:2010GReGr..42.2269B. doi:10.1007/s10714-010-0988-2. 
^ Kovacs, Z.; Cheng, K. S.; Harko, T. (2009). "Can stellar mass black holes be quark stars?". Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 400 (3): 1632–1642. arXiv:0908.2672. Bibcode:2009MNRAS.400.1632K. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15571.x. 
^ Kusenko, A. (2006). "Properties and signatures of supersymmetric Q-balls". arXiv:hep-ph/0612159. 
^ Hansson, J.; Sandin, F. (2005). "Preon stars: a new class of cosmic compact objects". Physics Letters B 616 (1–2): 1. arXiv:astro-ph/0410417. Bibcode:2005PhLB..616....1H. doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2005.04.034. 
^ Kiefer, C. (2006). "Quantum gravity: general introduction and recent developments". Annalen der Physik 15 (1–2): 129. arXiv:gr-qc/0508120. Bibcode:2006AnP...518..129K. doi:10.1002/andp.200510175. 
^ "[NKS, Mathur states, 't Hooft-Polyakov monopoles, and Ward-Takahashi identities] - A New Kind of Science: The NKS Forum". wolframscience.com. Retrieved 12 April 2015. 
^ Skenderis, K.; Taylor, M. (2008). "The fuzzball proposal for black holes". Physics Reports 467 (4–5): 117. arXiv:0804.0552. Bibcode:2008PhR...467..117S. doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2008.08.001. 
^ Hawking, S. W. (1971). "Gravitational Radiation from Colliding Black Holes". Physical Review Letters 26 (21): 1344–1346. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26.1344H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.1344. 
^ a b Wald, R. M. (2001). "The Thermodynamics of Black Holes". Living Reviews in Relativity 4: 6. arXiv:gr-qc/9912119. Bibcode:2001LRR.....4....6W. doi:10.12942/lrr-2001-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10. 
^ 't Hooft, G. (2001). "The Holographic Principle". In Zichichi, A. Basics and highlights in fundamental physics. Subnuclear series 37. World Scientific. arXiv:hep-th/0003004. ISBN 978-981-02-4536-8. 
^ Strominger, A.; Vafa, C. (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379 (1–4): 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0. 
^ Carlip, S. (2009). "Black Hole Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 89. arXiv:0807.4520. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6_3. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0. 
^ Hawking, S. W. "Does God Play Dice?". www.hawking.org.uk. Retrieved 2009-03-14. 
^ Giddings, S. B. (1995). "The black hole information paradox". Particles, Strings and Cosmology. Johns Hopkins Workshop on Current Problems in Particle Theory 19 and the PASCOS Interdisciplinary Symposium 5. arXiv:hep-th/9508151. 
^ Mathur, S. D. (2011). The information paradox: conflicts and resolutions. XXV International Symposium on Lepton Photon Interactions at High Energies. arXiv:1201.2079. 


^ Wald 1984, pp. 299–300
^ a b Wald, R. M. (1997). "Gravitational Collapse and Cosmic Censorship". arXiv:gr-qc/9710068 [gr-qc]. 
^ Overbye, Dennis (8 June 2015). "Black Hole Hunters". NASA. Retrieved 8 June 2015. 
^ Schutz, Bernard F. (2003). Gravity from the ground up. Cambridge University Press. p. 110. ISBN 0-521-45506-5. 
^ Davies, P. C. W. (1978). "Thermodynamics of Black Holes" (PDF). Reports on Progress in Physics 41 (8): 1313–1355. Bibcode:1978RPPh...41.1313D. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/41/8/004. 
^ a b c d Abbott, B.P.; et al. (2016). "Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger". Phys. Rev. Lett. 116: 061102. arXiv:1602.03837. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102. 
^ O. Straub, F.H. Vincent, M.A. Abramowicz, E. Gourgoulhon, T. Paumard, ``Modelling the black hole silhouette in Sgr A* with ion tori,Astron. Astroph 543 (2012) A8
^ Michell, J. (1784). "On the Means of Discovering the Distance, Magnitude, &c. of the Fixed Stars, in Consequence of the Diminution of the Velocity of Their Light, in Case Such a Diminution Should be Found to Take Place in any of Them, and Such Other Data Should be Procured from Observations, as Would be Farther Necessary for That Purpose". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 74 (0): 35–57. Bibcode:1784RSPT...74...35M. doi:10.1098/rstl.1784.0008. JSTOR 106576. 
^ Gillispie, C. C. (2000). Pierre-Simon Laplace, 1749–1827: a life in exact science. Princeton paperbacks. Princeton University Press. p. 175. ISBN 0-691-05027-9. 
^ Israel, W. (1989). "Dark stars: the evolution of an idea". In Hawking, S. W.; Israel, W. 300 Years of Gravitation. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-37976-2. 
^ Thorne 1994, pp. 123–124
^ a b Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Massenpunktes nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 7: 189–196.  and Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Kugel aus inkompressibler Flüssigkeit nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 18: 424–434. 
^ Droste, J. (1917). "On the field of a single centre in Einstein's theory of gravitation, and the motion of a particle in that field" (PDF). Proceedings Royal Academy Amsterdam 19 (1): 197–215. 
^ Kox, A. J. (1992). "General Relativity in the Netherlands: 1915–1920". In Eisenstaedt, J.; Kox, A. J. Studies in the history of general relativity. Birkhäuser. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-8176-3479-7. [dead link]
^ 't Hooft, G. (2009). "Introduction to the Theory of Black Holes" (PDF). Institute for Theoretical Physics / Spinoza Institute: 47–48. 
^ Eddington, Arthur (1926). The Internal Constitution of the Stars. Cambridge University Press. p. 6. 
^ Kip Thorne comments on this quote on pages 134-135 of his book Black Holes and Time Warps, writing that "The first conclusion was the Newtonian version of light not escaping; the second was a semi-accurate, relativistic description; and the third was typical Eddingtonian hyperbole ... when a star is as small as the critical circumference, the curvature is strong but not infinite, and space is definitely not wrapped around the star. Eddington may have known this, but his description made a good story, and it captured in a whimsical way the spirit of Schwarzschild's spacetime curvature."
^ Venkataraman, G. (1992). Chandrasekhar and his limit. Universities Press. p. 89. ISBN 81-7371-035-X. 
^ Detweiler, S. (1981). "Resource letter BH-1: Black holes". American Journal of Physics 49 (5): 394–400. Bibcode:1981AmJPh..49..394D. doi:10.1119/1.12686. 
^ Harpaz, A. (1994). Stellar evolution. A K Peters. p. 105. ISBN 1-56881-012-1. 
^ a b Oppenheimer, J. R.; Volkoff, G. M. (1939). "On Massive Neutron Cores". Physical Review 55 (4): 374–381. Bibcode:1939PhRv...55..374O. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.55.374. 
^ Ruffini, R.; Wheeler, J. A. (1971). "Introducing the black hole" (PDF). Physics Today 24 (1): 30–41. Bibcode:1971PhT....24a..30R. doi:10.1063/1.3022513. 
^ Finkelstein, D. (1958). "Past-Future Asymmetry of the Gravitational Field of a Point Particle". Physical Review 110 (4): 965–967. Bibcode:1958PhRv..110..965F. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.110.965. 
^ Kruskal, M. (1960). "Maximal Extension of Schwarzschild Metric". Physical Review 119 (5): 1743. Bibcode:1960PhRv..119.1743K. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.119.1743. 
^ Hewish, A.; et al. (1968). "Observation of a Rapidly Pulsating Radio Source". Nature 217 (5130): 709–713. Bibcode:1968Natur.217..709H. doi:10.1038/217709a0 
^ Pilkington, J. D. H.; et al. (1968). "Observations of some further Pulsed Radio Sources". Nature 218 (5137): 126–129. Bibcode:1968Natur.218..126P. doi:10.1038/218126a0 
^ Hewish, A. (1970). "Pulsars". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 8 (1): 265–296. Bibcode:1970ARA&A...8..265H. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.08.090170.001405. 
^ Newman, E. T.; et al. (1965). "Metric of a Rotating, Charged Mass". Journal of Mathematical Physics 6 (6): 918. Bibcode:1965JMP.....6..918N. doi:10.1063/1.1704351 
^ Israel, W. (1967). "Event Horizons in Static Vacuum Space-Times". Physical Review 164 (5): 1776. Bibcode:1967PhRv..164.1776I. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.164.1776. 
^ Carter, B. (1971). "Axisymmetric Black Hole Has Only Two Degrees of Freedom". Physical Review Letters 26 (6): 331. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26..331C. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.331. 
^ Carter, B. (1977). "The vacuum black hole uniqueness theorem and its conceivable generalisations". Proceedings of the 1st Marcel Grossmann meeting on general relativity. pp. 243–254. 
^ Robinson, D. (1975). "Uniqueness of the Kerr Black Hole". Physical Review Letters 34 (14): 905. Bibcode:1975PhRvL..34..905R. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.34.905. 
^ a b Heusler, M. (1998). "Stationary Black Holes: Uniqueness and Beyond". Living Reviews in Relativity 1 (6). doi:10.12942/lrr-1998-6. Archived from the original on 1999-02-03. Retrieved 2011-02-08. 
^ a b Penrose, R. (1965). "Gravitational Collapse and Space-Time Singularities". Physical Review Letters 14 (3): 57. Bibcode:1965PhRvL..14...57P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.14.57. 
^ Ford, L. H. (2003). "The Classical Singularity Theorems and Their Quantum Loopholes". International Journal of Theoretical Physics 42 (6): 1219. doi:10.1023/A:1025754515197. 
^ Bardeen, J. M.; Carter, B.; Hawking, S. W. (1973). "The four laws of black hole mechanics". Communications in Mathematical Physics 31 (2): 161–170. Bibcode:1973CMaPh..31..161B. doi:10.1007/BF01645742. MR MR0334798. Zbl 1125.83309. 
^ a b c Hawking, S. W. (1974). "Black hole explosions?". Nature 248 (5443): 30–31. Bibcode:1974Natur.248...30H. doi:10.1038/248030a0. 
^ Quinion, M. (26 April 2008). "Black Hole". World Wide Words. Retrieved 2008-06-17. 
^ Carroll 2004, p. 253
^ Thorne, K. S.; Price, R. H. (1986). Black holes: the membrane paradigm. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-03770-8. 
^ Anderson, Warren G. (1996). "The Black Hole Information Loss Problem". Usenet Physics FAQ. Retrieved 2009-03-24. 
^ Preskill, J. (1994-10-21). Black holes and information: A crisis in quantum physics (PDF). Caltech Theory Seminar. 
^ Hawking & Ellis 1973, Appendix B
^ Seeds, Michael A.; Backman, Dana E. (2007). Perspectives on Astronomy. Cengage Learning. p. 167. ISBN 0-495-11352-2 
^ Shapiro, S. L.; Teukolsky, S. A. (1983). Black holes, white dwarfs, and neutron stars: the physics of compact objects. John Wiley and Sons. p. 357. ISBN 0-471-87316-0. 
^ Berger, B. K. (2002). "Numerical Approaches to Spacetime Singularities". Living Reviews in Relativity 5: 1. arXiv:gr-qc/0201056. Bibcode:2002LRR.....5....1B. doi:10.12942/lrr-2002-1. Retrieved 2007-08-04. 
^ McClintock, J. E.; Shafee, R.; Narayan, R.; Remillard, R. A.; Davis, S. W.; Li, L.-X. (2006). "The Spin of the Near-Extreme Kerr Black Hole GRS 1915+105". Astrophysical Journal 652 (1): 518–539. arXiv:astro-ph/0606076. Bibcode:2006ApJ...652..518M. doi:10.1086/508457. 
^ Wald 1984, pp. 124–125
^ Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973, p. 848
^ Wheeler 2007, p. 179
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 5.4 and 7.3
^ Carroll 2004, p. 217
^ Carroll 2004, p. 218
^ "Inside a black hole". Knowing the universe and its secrets. Retrieved 2009-03-26. 
^ Carroll 2004, p. 222
^ Emparan, R.; Reall, H. S. (2008). "Black Holes in Higher Dimensions". Living Reviews in Relativity 11 (6). arXiv:0801.3471. Bibcode:2008LRR....11....6E. doi:10.12942/lrr-2008-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10. 
^ Obers, N. A. (2009). Papantonopoulos, Eleftherios, ed. "Black Holes in Higher-Dimensional Gravity". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 211–258. arXiv:0802.0519. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0. 
^ hawking & ellis 1973, Ch. 9.3
^ Carroll 2004, p. 205
^ Carroll 2004, pp. 264–265
^ Carroll 2004, p. 252
^ Lewis, G. F.; Kwan, J. (2007). "No Way Back: Maximizing Survival Time Below the Schwarzschild Event Horizon". Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 24 (2): 46–52. arXiv:0705.1029. Bibcode:2007PASA...24...46L. doi:10.1071/AS07012. 
^ Wheeler 2007, p. 182
^ Carroll 2004, pp. 257–259 and 265–266
^ Droz, S.; Israel, W.; Morsink, S. M. (1996). "Black holes: the inside story". Physics World 9 (1): 34–37. Bibcode:1996PhyW....9...34D. 
^ Carroll 2004, p. 266
^ Poisson, E.; Israel, W. (1990). "Internal structure of black holes". Physical Review D 41 (6): 1796. Bibcode:1990PhRvD..41.1796P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.41.1796. 
^ Wald 1984, p. 212
^ Hamade, R. (1996). "Black Holes and Quantum Gravity". Cambridge Relativity and Cosmology. University of Cambridge. Retrieved 2009-03-26. 
^ Palmer, D. "Ask an Astrophysicist: Quantum Gravity and Black Holes". NASA. Retrieved 2009-03-26. 
^ a b Nitta, Daisuke; Chiba, Takeshi; Sugiyama, Naoshi (September 2011). "Shadows of colliding black holes". Physical Review D 84 (6). arXiv:1106.2425. Bibcode:2011PhRvD..84f3008N. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.84.063008 
^ Nemiroff, R. J. (1993). "Visual distortions near a neutron star and black hole". American Journal of Physics 61 (7): 619. arXiv:astro-ph/9312003. Bibcode:1993AmJPh..61..619N. doi:10.1119/1.17224. 
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.6
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.7
^ Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973
^ Einstein, A. (1939). "On A Stationary System With Spherical Symmetry Consisting of Many Gravitating Masses". Annals of Mathematics 40 (4): 922–936. doi:10.2307/1968902. JSTOR 1968902. 
^ Kerr, R. P. (2009). "The Kerr and Kerr-Schild metrics". In Wiltshire, D. L.; Visser, M.; Scott, S. M. The Kerr Spacetime. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:0706.1109. ISBN 978-0-521-88512-6. 
^ Hawking, S. W.; Penrose, R. (January 1970). "The Singularities of Gravitational Collapse and Cosmology". Proceedings of the Royal Society A 314 (1519): 529–548. Bibcode:1970RSPSA.314..529H. doi:10.1098/rspa.1970.0021. JSTOR 2416467. 
^ a b c Carroll 2004, Section 5.8
^ a b c Rees, M. J.; Volonteri, M. (2007). "Massive black holes: formation and evolution". In Karas, V.; Matt, G. Black Holes from Stars to Galaxies—Across the Range of Masses. Cambridge University Press. pp. 51–58. arXiv:astro-ph/0701512. ISBN 978-0-521-86347-6. 
^ Penrose, R. (2002). "Gravitational Collapse: The Role of General Relativity" (PDF). General Relativity and Gravitation 34 (7): 1141. Bibcode:2002GReGr..34.1141P. doi:10.1023/A:1016578408204. 
^ Carr, B. J. (2005). "Primordial Black Holes: Do They Exist and Are They Useful?". In Suzuki, H.; Yokoyama, J.; Suto, Y.; Sato, K. Inflating Horizon of Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology. Universal Academy Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0511743. ISBN 4-946443-94-0. 
^ Giddings, S. B.; Thomas, S. (2002). "High energy colliders as black hole factories: The end of short distance physics". Physical Review D 65 (5): 056010. arXiv:hep-ph/0106219. Bibcode:2002PhRvD..65e6010G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.65.056010. 
^ Harada, T. (2006). "Is there a black hole minimum mass?". Physical Review D 74 (8): 084004. arXiv:gr-qc/0609055. Bibcode:2006PhRvD..74h4004H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.74.084004. 
^ Arkani–Hamed, N.; Dimopoulos, S.; Dvali, G. (1998). "The hierarchy problem and new dimensions at a millimeter". Physics Letters B 429 (3–4): 263. arXiv:hep-ph/9803315. Bibcode:1998PhLB..429..263A. doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(98)00466-3. 
^ LHC Safety Assessment Group. "Review of the Safety of LHC Collisions" (PDF). CERN. 
^ Cavaglià, M. (2010). "Particle accelerators as black hole factories?". Einstein-Online (Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute)) 4: 1010. 
^ Vesperini, E.; McMillan, S. L. W.; d'Ercole, A.; et al. (2010). "Intermediate-Mass Black Holes in Early Globular Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 713 (1): L41–L44. arXiv:1003.3470. Bibcode:2010ApJ...713L..41V. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/713/1/L41. 
^ Zwart, S. F. P.; Baumgardt, H.; Hut, P.; et al. (2004). "Formation of massive black holes through runaway collisions in dense young star clusters". Nature 428 (6984): 724–6. arXiv:astro-ph/0402622. Bibcode:2004Natur.428..724P. doi:10.1038/nature02448. PMID 15085124. 
^ O'Leary, R. M.; Rasio, F. A.; Fregeau, J. M.; et al. (2006). "Binary Mergers and Growth of Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal 637 (2): 937. arXiv:astro-ph/0508224. Bibcode:2006ApJ...637..937O. doi:10.1086/498446. 
^ Page, D. N. (2005). "Hawking radiation and black hole thermodynamics". New Journal of Physics 7: 203. arXiv:hep-th/0409024. Bibcode:2005NJPh....7..203P. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/7/1/203. 
^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 9.6
^ "Evaporating black holes?". Einstein online. Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics. 2010. Retrieved 2010-12-12. 
^ Giddings, S. B.; Mangano, M. L. (2008). "Astrophysical implications of hypothetical stable TeV-scale black holes". Physical Review D 78 (3): 035009. arXiv:0806.3381. Bibcode:2008PhRvD..78c5009G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.78.035009. 
^ Peskin, M. E. (2008). "The end of the world at the Large Hadron Collider?". Physics 1: 14. Bibcode:2008PhyOJ...1...14P. doi:10.1103/Physics.1.14. 
^ Fichtel, C. E.; Bertsch, D. L.; Dingus, B. L.; et al. (1994). "Search of the energetic gamma-ray experiment telescope (EGRET) data for high-energy gamma-ray microsecond bursts". Astrophysical Journal 434 (2): 557–559. Bibcode:1994ApJ...434..557F. doi:10.1086/174758. 
^ Naeye, R. "Testing Fundamental Physics". NASA. Retrieved 2008-09-16. 
^ "Ripped Apart by a Black Hole". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 19 July 2013. 
^ O'Neill, Ian (2 July 2015). "Event Horizon Telescope Will Probe Spacetime's Mysteries". Discovery News. Retrieved 6 December 2015. 
^ Johnson, M. D.; Fish, V. L.; Doeleman, S. S.; Marrone, D. P.; Plambeck, R. L.; Wardle, J. F. C.; Akiyama, K.; Asada, K.; Beaudoin, C. (2015-12-04). "Resolved magnetic-field structure and variability near the event horizon of Sagittarius A*". Science 350 (6265): 1242–1245. arXiv:1512.01220. Bibcode:2015Sci...350.1242J. doi:10.1126/science.aac7087. ISSN 0036-8075. 
^ "Event Horizon Telescope Reveals Magnetic Fields at Milky Way's Central Black Hole". cfa.harvard.edu. 3 December 2015. Retrieved 12 January 2016. 
^ Overbye, Dennis (11 February 2016). "Physicists Detect Gravitational Waves, Proving Einstein Right". New York Times. Retrieved 11 February 2016. 
^ Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Properties of the binary black hole merger GW150914". arXiv:1602.03840. 
^ a b Cardoso, V., Franzin, E., and Pani, P. (2016). "Is the gravitational-wave ringdown a probe of the event horizon?". Physical Review Letters. arXiv:1602.07309. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Tests of general relativity with GW150914". LIGO. Retrieved 12 February 2016. 
^ "Astrophysical Implications of the Binary Black Hole Merger GW150914". Astrophys. J. Lett. 818 (2): L22. arXiv:1602.03846. Bibcode:2016ApJ...818L..22A. doi:10.3847/2041-8205/818/2/L22. 
^ a b Gillessen, S.; Eisenhauer, F.; Trippe, S.; et al. (2009). "Monitoring Stellar Orbits around the Massive Black Hole in the Galactic Center". The Astrophysical Journal 692 (2): 1075. arXiv:0810.4674. Bibcode:2009ApJ...692.1075G. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/692/2/1075. 
^ a b Ghez, A. M.; Klein, B. L.; Morris, M.; et al. (1998). "High Proper‐Motion Stars in the Vicinity of Sagittarius A*: Evidence for a Supermassive Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy". The Astrophysical Journal 509 (2): 678. arXiv:astro-ph/9807210. Bibcode:1998ApJ...509..678G. doi:10.1086/306528. 
^ Broderick, Avery; Loeb, Abraham; Narayan, Ramesh (August 2009). "The Event Horizon of Sagittarius A*". The Astrophysical Journal 701: 1357. arXiv:0903.1105. Bibcode:2009ApJ...701.1357B. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/701/2/1357. 
^ a b "NASA's NuSTAR Sees Rare Blurring of Black Hole Light". NASA. 12 August 2014. Retrieved 12 August 2014. 
^ "Short-cut method of solution of geodesic equations for Schwarzchild black hole", J.A. Marck, Class.Quant. Grav. 13 (1996) 393-402.
^ a b c McClintock, J. E.; Remillard, R. A. (2006). "Black Hole Binaries". In Lewin, W.; van der Klis, M. Compact Stellar X-ray Sources. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0306213. ISBN 0-521-82659-4.  section 4.1.5.
^ a b c d e f g h i Celotti, A.; Miller, J. C.; Sciama, D. W. (1999). "Astrophysical evidence for the existence of black holes". Classical and Quantum Gravity 16 (12A): A3–A21. arXiv:astro-ph/9912186. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/16/12A/301. 
^ Winter, L. M.; Mushotzky, R. F.; Reynolds, C. S. (2006). "XMM‐Newton Archival Study of the Ultraluminous X‐Ray Population in Nearby Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal 649 (2): 730. arXiv:astro-ph/0512480. Bibcode:2006ApJ...649..730W. doi:10.1086/506579. 
^ information@eso.org. "Hubble directly observes the disc around a black hole". www.spacetelescope.org. Retrieved 2016-03-07. 
^ Muñoz, José A.; Mediavilla, Evencio; Kochanek, Christopher S.; Falco, Emilio; Mosquera, Ana María (2011-12-01). "A Study of Gravitational Lens Chromaticity with the Hubble Space Telescope". The Astrophysical Journal 742 (2): 67. arXiv:1107.5932. Bibcode:2011ApJ...742...67M. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/742/2/67. ISSN 0004-637X. 
^ Bolton, C. T. (1972). "Identification of Cygnus X-1 with HDE 226868". Nature 235 (5336): 271–273. Bibcode:1972Natur.235..271B. doi:10.1038/235271b0. 
^ Webster, B. L.; Murdin, P. (1972). "Cygnus X-1—a Spectroscopic Binary with a Heavy Companion ?". Nature 235 (5332): 37–38. Bibcode:1972Natur.235...37W. doi:10.1038/235037a0. 
^ Rolston, B. (10 November 1997). "The First Black Hole". The bulletin. University of Toronto. Archived from the original on 2008-05-02. Retrieved 2008-03-11. 
^ Shipman, H. L.; Yu, Z; Du, Y.W (1 January 1975). "The implausible history of triple star models for Cygnus X-1 Evidence for a black hole". Astrophysical Letters 16 (1): 9–12. Bibcode:1975ApL....16....9S. doi:10.1016/S0304-8853(99)00384-4. 
^ Narayan, R.; McClintock, J. (2008). "Advection-dominated accretion and the black hole event horizon". New Astronomy Reviews 51 (10–12): 733. arXiv:0803.0322. Bibcode:2008NewAR..51..733N. doi:10.1016/j.newar.2008.03.002. 
^ "NASA scientists identify smallest known black hole" (Press release). Goddard Space Flight Center. 2008-04-01. Retrieved 2009-03-14. 
^ Krolik, J. H. (1999). Active Galactic Nuclei. Princeton University Press. Ch. 1.2. ISBN 0-691-01151-6. 
^ Sparke, L. S.; Gallagher, J. S. (2000). Galaxies in the Universe: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press. Ch. 9.1. ISBN 0-521-59740-4. 
^ Chou, Felicia; Anderson, Janet; Watzke, Megan (5 January 2015). "RELEASE 15-001 - NASA’s Chandra Detects Record-Breaking Outburst from Milky Way’s Black Hole". NASA. Retrieved 6 January 2015. 
^ Kormendy, J.; Richstone, D. (1995). "Inward Bound—The Search For Supermassive Black Holes In Galactic Nuclei". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 33 (1): 581–624. Bibcode:1995ARA&A..33..581K. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.33.090195.003053. 
^ King, A. (2003). "Black Holes, Galaxy Formation, and the MBH-σ Relation". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 596 (1): 27–29. arXiv:astro-ph/0308342. Bibcode:2003ApJ...596L..27K. doi:10.1086/379143. 
^ Ferrarese, L.; Merritt, D. (2000). "A Fundamental Relation Between Supermassive Black Holes and their Host Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 539 (1): 9–12. arXiv:astro-ph/0006053. Bibcode:2000ApJ...539L...9F. doi:10.1086/312838. 
^ "A Black Hole's Dinner is Fast Approaching". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 6 February 2012. 
^ a b Bozza, V. (2010). "Gravitational Lensing by Black Holes". General Relativity and Gravitation 42 (42): 2269–2300. arXiv:0911.2187. Bibcode:2010GReGr..42.2269B. doi:10.1007/s10714-010-0988-2. 
^ Kovacs, Z.; Cheng, K. S.; Harko, T. (2009). "Can stellar mass black holes be quark stars?". Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 400 (3): 1632–1642. arXiv:0908.2672. Bibcode:2009MNRAS.400.1632K. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15571.x. 
^ Kusenko, A. (2006). "Properties and signatures of supersymmetric Q-balls". arXiv:hep-ph/0612159. 
^ Hansson, J.; Sandin, F. (2005). "Preon stars: a new class of cosmic compact objects". Physics Letters B 616 (1–2): 1. arXiv:astro-ph/0410417. Bibcode:2005PhLB..616....1H. doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2005.04.034. 
^ Kiefer, C. (2006). "Quantum gravity: general introduction and recent developments". Annalen der Physik 15 (1–2): 129. arXiv:gr-qc/0508120. Bibcode:2006AnP...518..129K. doi:10.1002/andp.200510175. 
^ "[NKS, Mathur states, 't Hooft-Polyakov monopoles, and Ward-Takahashi identities] - A New Kind of Science: The NKS Forum". wolframscience.com. Retrieved 12 April 2015. 
^ Skenderis, K.; Taylor, M. (2008). "The fuzzball proposal for black holes". Physics Reports 467 (4–5): 117. arXiv:0804.0552. Bibcode:2008PhR...467..117S. doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2008.08.001. 
^ Hawking, S. W. (1971). "Gravitational Radiation from Colliding Black Holes". Physical Review Letters 26 (21): 1344–1346. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26.1344H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.1344. 
^ a b Wald, R. M. (2001). "The Thermodynamics of Black Holes". Living Reviews in Relativity 4: 6. arXiv:gr-qc/9912119. Bibcode:2001LRR.....4....6W. doi:10.12942/lrr-2001-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10. 
^ 't Hooft, G. (2001). "The Holographic Principle". In Zichichi, A. Basics and highlights in fundamental physics. Subnuclear series 37. World Scientific. arXiv:hep-th/0003004. ISBN 978-981-02-4536-8. 
^ Strominger, A.; Vafa, C. (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379 (1–4): 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0. 
^ Carlip, S. (2009). "Black Hole Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 89. arXiv:0807.4520. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6_3. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0. 
^ Hawking, S. W. "Does God Play Dice?". www.hawking.org.uk. Retrieved 2009-03-14. 
^ Giddings, S. B. (1995). "The black hole information paradox". Particles, Strings and Cosmology. Johns Hopkins Workshop on Current Problems in Particle Theory 19 and the PASCOS Interdisciplinary Symposium 5. arXiv:hep-th/9508151. 
^ Mathur, S. D. (2011). The information paradox: conflicts and resolutions. XXV International Symposium on Lepton Photon Interactions at High Energies. arXiv:1201.2079. 
^ Wald 1984, pp. 299–300^^^Wald 1984, pp. 299–300Wald 1984^ a b Wald, R. M. (1997). "Gravitational Collapse and Cosmic Censorship". arXiv:gr-qc/9710068 [gr-qc]. ^ a baaaabbbbWald, R. M. (1997). "Gravitational Collapse and Cosmic Censorship". arXiv:gr-qc/9710068 [gr-qc]. Wald, R. M. (1997). "Gravitational Collapse and Cosmic Censorship". arXiv:gr-qc/9710068 [gr-qc].Wald, R. M.arXivgr-qc/9710068gr-qc  ^ Overbye, Dennis (8 June 2015). "Black Hole Hunters". NASA. Retrieved 8 June 2015. ^^^Overbye, Dennis (8 June 2015). "Black Hole Hunters". NASA. Retrieved 8 June 2015. Overbye, Dennis (8 June 2015). "Black Hole Hunters". NASA. Retrieved 8 June 2015.Overbye, Dennis"Black Hole Hunters"NASANASA. Retrieved 8 June 20158 June  ^ Schutz, Bernard F. (2003). Gravity from the ground up. Cambridge University Press. p. 110. ISBN 0-521-45506-5. ^^^Schutz, Bernard F. (2003). Gravity from the ground up. Cambridge University Press. p. 110. ISBN 0-521-45506-5. Schutz, Bernard F. (2003). Gravity from the ground up. Cambridge University Press. p. 110. ISBN 0-521-45506-5.Schutz, Bernard F.Gravity from the ground upGravity from the ground upISBN0-521-45506-5  ^ Davies, P. C. W. (1978). "Thermodynamics of Black Holes" (PDF). Reports on Progress in Physics 41 (8): 1313–1355. Bibcode:1978RPPh...41.1313D. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/41/8/004. ^^^Davies, P. C. W. (1978). "Thermodynamics of Black Holes" (PDF). Reports on Progress in Physics 41 (8): 1313–1355. Bibcode:1978RPPh...41.1313D. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/41/8/004. Davies, P. C. W. (1978). "Thermodynamics of Black Holes" (PDF). Reports on Progress in Physics 41 (8): 1313–1355. Bibcode:1978RPPh...41.1313D. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/41/8/004.Davies, P. C. W."Thermodynamics of Black Holes"(PDF)Reports on Progress in PhysicsReports on Progress in Physics41Bibcode1978RPPh...41.1313Ddoi10.1088/0034-4885/41/8/004  ^ a b c d Abbott, B.P.; et al. (2016). "Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger". Phys. Rev. Lett. 116: 061102. arXiv:1602.03837. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102. ^ a b c daaaabbbbccccddddAbbott, B.P.; et al. (2016). "Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger". Phys. Rev. Lett. 116: 061102. arXiv:1602.03837. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102. Abbott, B.P.; et al. (2016). "Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger". Phys. Rev. Lett. 116: 061102. arXiv:1602.03837. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102."Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger"Phys. Rev. Lett.Phys. Rev. Lett.116arXiv1602.03837Bibcode2016PhRvL.116f1102Adoi10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102  ^ O. Straub, F.H. Vincent, M.A. Abramowicz, E. Gourgoulhon, T. Paumard, ``Modelling the black hole silhouette in Sgr A* with ion tori,Astron. Astroph 543 (2012) A8^^^O. Straub, F.H. Vincent, M.A. Abramowicz, E. Gourgoulhon, T. Paumard, ``Modelling the black hole silhouette in Sgr A* with ion tori,Astron. Astroph 543 (2012) A8,Astron. Astroph 543 (2012) A8^ Michell, J. (1784). "On the Means of Discovering the Distance, Magnitude, &c. of the Fixed Stars, in Consequence of the Diminution of the Velocity of Their Light, in Case Such a Diminution Should be Found to Take Place in any of Them, and Such Other Data Should be Procured from Observations, as Would be Farther Necessary for That Purpose". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 74 (0): 35–57. Bibcode:1784RSPT...74...35M. doi:10.1098/rstl.1784.0008. JSTOR 106576. ^^^Michell, J. (1784). "On the Means of Discovering the Distance, Magnitude, &c. of the Fixed Stars, in Consequence of the Diminution of the Velocity of Their Light, in Case Such a Diminution Should be Found to Take Place in any of Them, and Such Other Data Should be Procured from Observations, as Would be Farther Necessary for That Purpose". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 74 (0): 35–57. Bibcode:1784RSPT...74...35M. doi:10.1098/rstl.1784.0008. JSTOR 106576. Michell, J. (1784). "On the Means of Discovering the Distance, Magnitude, &c. of the Fixed Stars, in Consequence of the Diminution of the Velocity of Their Light, in Case Such a Diminution Should be Found to Take Place in any of Them, and Such Other Data Should be Procured from Observations, as Would be Farther Necessary for That Purpose". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 74 (0): 35–57. Bibcode:1784RSPT...74...35M. doi:10.1098/rstl.1784.0008. JSTOR 106576.Michell, J.Philosophical Transactions of the Royal SocietyPhilosophical Transactions of the Royal Society74Bibcode1784RSPT...74...35Mdoi10.1098/rstl.1784.0008JSTOR106576  ^ Gillispie, C. C. (2000). Pierre-Simon Laplace, 1749–1827: a life in exact science. Princeton paperbacks. Princeton University Press. p. 175. ISBN 0-691-05027-9. ^^^Gillispie, C. C. (2000). Pierre-Simon Laplace, 1749–1827: a life in exact science. Princeton paperbacks. Princeton University Press. p. 175. ISBN 0-691-05027-9. Gillispie, C. C. (2000). Pierre-Simon Laplace, 1749–1827: a life in exact science. Princeton paperbacks. Princeton University Press. p. 175. ISBN 0-691-05027-9.Pierre-Simon Laplace, 1749–1827: a life in exact sciencePierre-Simon Laplace, 1749–1827: a life in exact scienceISBN0-691-05027-9  ^ Israel, W. (1989). "Dark stars: the evolution of an idea". In Hawking, S. W.; Israel, W. 300 Years of Gravitation. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-37976-2. ^^^Israel, W. (1989). "Dark stars: the evolution of an idea". In Hawking, S. W.; Israel, W. 300 Years of Gravitation. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-37976-2. Israel, W. (1989). "Dark stars: the evolution of an idea". In Hawking, S. W.; Israel, W. 300 Years of Gravitation. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-37976-2.Hawking, S. W.300 Years of Gravitation300 Years of GravitationCambridge University PressISBN978-0-521-37976-2  ^ Thorne 1994, pp. 123–124^^^Thorne 1994, pp. 123–124Thorne 1994^ a b Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Massenpunktes nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 7: 189–196.  and Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Kugel aus inkompressibler Flüssigkeit nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 18: 424–434. ^ a baaaabbbbSchwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Massenpunktes nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 7: 189–196.  and Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Kugel aus inkompressibler Flüssigkeit nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 18: 424–434. Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Massenpunktes nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 7: 189–196.Schwarzschild, K."Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Massenpunktes nach der Einsteinschen Theorie"Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften7  Schwarzschild, K. (1916). "Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Kugel aus inkompressibler Flüssigkeit nach der Einsteinschen Theorie". Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 18: 424–434.Schwarzschild, K."Über das Gravitationsfeld eines Kugel aus inkompressibler Flüssigkeit nach der Einsteinschen Theorie"Sitzungsberichte der Königlich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften18  ^ Droste, J. (1917). "On the field of a single centre in Einstein's theory of gravitation, and the motion of a particle in that field" (PDF). Proceedings Royal Academy Amsterdam 19 (1): 197–215. ^^^Droste, J. (1917). "On the field of a single centre in Einstein's theory of gravitation, and the motion of a particle in that field" (PDF). Proceedings Royal Academy Amsterdam 19 (1): 197–215. Droste, J. (1917). "On the field of a single centre in Einstein's theory of gravitation, and the motion of a particle in that field" (PDF). Proceedings Royal Academy Amsterdam 19 (1): 197–215."On the field of a single centre in Einstein's theory of gravitation, and the motion of a particle in that field"(PDF)Proceedings Royal Academy Amsterdam19  ^ Kox, A. J. (1992). "General Relativity in the Netherlands: 1915–1920". In Eisenstaedt, J.; Kox, A. J. Studies in the history of general relativity. Birkhäuser. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-8176-3479-7. [dead link]^^^Kox, A. J. (1992). "General Relativity in the Netherlands: 1915–1920". In Eisenstaedt, J.; Kox, A. J. Studies in the history of general relativity. Birkhäuser. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-8176-3479-7. [dead link]Kox, A. J. (1992). "General Relativity in the Netherlands: 1915–1920". In Eisenstaedt, J.; Kox, A. J. Studies in the history of general relativity. Birkhäuser. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-8176-3479-7."General Relativity in the Netherlands: 1915–1920"Studies in the history of general relativityISBN978-0-8176-3479-7  [dead link][dead link]dead linkdead linkdead link^ 't Hooft, G. (2009). "Introduction to the Theory of Black Holes" (PDF). Institute for Theoretical Physics / Spinoza Institute: 47–48. ^^^'t Hooft, G. (2009). "Introduction to the Theory of Black Holes" (PDF). Institute for Theoretical Physics / Spinoza Institute: 47–48. 't Hooft, G. (2009). "Introduction to the Theory of Black Holes" (PDF). Institute for Theoretical Physics / Spinoza Institute: 47–48.'t Hooft, G."Introduction to the Theory of Black Holes"(PDF)  ^ Eddington, Arthur (1926). The Internal Constitution of the Stars. Cambridge University Press. p. 6. ^^^Eddington, Arthur (1926). The Internal Constitution of the Stars. Cambridge University Press. p. 6. Eddington, Arthur (1926). The Internal Constitution of the Stars. Cambridge University Press. p. 6.Eddington, ArthurThe Internal Constitution of the StarsThe Internal Constitution of the Stars  ^ Kip Thorne comments on this quote on pages 134-135 of his book Black Holes and Time Warps, writing that "The first conclusion was the Newtonian version of light not escaping; the second was a semi-accurate, relativistic description; and the third was typical Eddingtonian hyperbole ... when a star is as small as the critical circumference, the curvature is strong but not infinite, and space is definitely not wrapped around the star. Eddington may have known this, but his description made a good story, and it captured in a whimsical way the spirit of Schwarzschild's spacetime curvature."^^^Kip Thorne comments on this quote on pages 134-135 of his book Black Holes and Time Warps, writing that "The first conclusion was the Newtonian version of light not escaping; the second was a semi-accurate, relativistic description; and the third was typical Eddingtonian hyperbole ... when a star is as small as the critical circumference, the curvature is strong but not infinite, and space is definitely not wrapped around the star. Eddington may have known this, but his description made a good story, and it captured in a whimsical way the spirit of Schwarzschild's spacetime curvature."Kip Thornepages 134-135Black Holes and Time Warps^ Venkataraman, G. (1992). Chandrasekhar and his limit. Universities Press. p. 89. ISBN 81-7371-035-X. ^^^Venkataraman, G. (1992). Chandrasekhar and his limit. Universities Press. p. 89. ISBN 81-7371-035-X. Venkataraman, G. (1992). Chandrasekhar and his limit. Universities Press. p. 89. ISBN 81-7371-035-X.Chandrasekhar and his limitChandrasekhar and his limitISBN81-7371-035-X  ^ Detweiler, S. (1981). "Resource letter BH-1: Black holes". American Journal of Physics 49 (5): 394–400. Bibcode:1981AmJPh..49..394D. doi:10.1119/1.12686. ^^^Detweiler, S. (1981). "Resource letter BH-1: Black holes". American Journal of Physics 49 (5): 394–400. Bibcode:1981AmJPh..49..394D. doi:10.1119/1.12686. Detweiler, S. (1981). "Resource letter BH-1: Black holes". American Journal of Physics 49 (5): 394–400. Bibcode:1981AmJPh..49..394D. doi:10.1119/1.12686.American Journal of PhysicsAmerican Journal of Physics49Bibcode1981AmJPh..49..394Ddoi10.1119/1.12686  ^ Harpaz, A. (1994). Stellar evolution. A K Peters. p. 105. ISBN 1-56881-012-1. ^^^Harpaz, A. (1994). Stellar evolution. A K Peters. p. 105. ISBN 1-56881-012-1. Harpaz, A. (1994). Stellar evolution. A K Peters. p. 105. ISBN 1-56881-012-1.Stellar evolutionStellar evolutionA K PetersISBN1-56881-012-1  ^ a b Oppenheimer, J. R.; Volkoff, G. M. (1939). "On Massive Neutron Cores". Physical Review 55 (4): 374–381. Bibcode:1939PhRv...55..374O. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.55.374. ^ a baaaabbbbOppenheimer, J. R.; Volkoff, G. M. (1939). "On Massive Neutron Cores". Physical Review 55 (4): 374–381. Bibcode:1939PhRv...55..374O. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.55.374. Oppenheimer, J. R.; Volkoff, G. M. (1939). "On Massive Neutron Cores". Physical Review 55 (4): 374–381. Bibcode:1939PhRv...55..374O. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.55.374.Oppenheimer, J. R.Volkoff, G. M.Physical ReviewPhysical Review55Bibcode1939PhRv...55..374Odoi10.1103/PhysRev.55.374  ^ Ruffini, R.; Wheeler, J. A. (1971). "Introducing the black hole" (PDF). Physics Today 24 (1): 30–41. Bibcode:1971PhT....24a..30R. doi:10.1063/1.3022513. ^^^Ruffini, R.; Wheeler, J. A. (1971). "Introducing the black hole" (PDF). Physics Today 24 (1): 30–41. Bibcode:1971PhT....24a..30R. doi:10.1063/1.3022513. Ruffini, R.; Wheeler, J. A. (1971). "Introducing the black hole" (PDF). Physics Today 24 (1): 30–41. Bibcode:1971PhT....24a..30R. doi:10.1063/1.3022513.Ruffini, R.Wheeler, J. A."Introducing the black hole"(PDF)Physics TodayPhysics Today24Bibcode1971PhT....24a..30Rdoi10.1063/1.3022513  ^ Finkelstein, D. (1958). "Past-Future Asymmetry of the Gravitational Field of a Point Particle". Physical Review 110 (4): 965–967. Bibcode:1958PhRv..110..965F. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.110.965. ^^^Finkelstein, D. (1958). "Past-Future Asymmetry of the Gravitational Field of a Point Particle". Physical Review 110 (4): 965–967. Bibcode:1958PhRv..110..965F. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.110.965. Finkelstein, D. (1958). "Past-Future Asymmetry of the Gravitational Field of a Point Particle". Physical Review 110 (4): 965–967. Bibcode:1958PhRv..110..965F. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.110.965.Finkelstein, D.Physical ReviewPhysical Review110Bibcode1958PhRv..110..965Fdoi10.1103/PhysRev.110.965  ^ Kruskal, M. (1960). "Maximal Extension of Schwarzschild Metric". Physical Review 119 (5): 1743. Bibcode:1960PhRv..119.1743K. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.119.1743. ^^^Kruskal, M. (1960). "Maximal Extension of Schwarzschild Metric". Physical Review 119 (5): 1743. Bibcode:1960PhRv..119.1743K. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.119.1743. Kruskal, M. (1960). "Maximal Extension of Schwarzschild Metric". Physical Review 119 (5): 1743. Bibcode:1960PhRv..119.1743K. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.119.1743.Kruskal, M.Physical ReviewPhysical Review119Bibcode1960PhRv..119.1743Kdoi10.1103/PhysRev.119.1743  ^ Hewish, A.; et al. (1968). "Observation of a Rapidly Pulsating Radio Source". Nature 217 (5130): 709–713. Bibcode:1968Natur.217..709H. doi:10.1038/217709a0 ^^^Hewish, A.; et al. (1968). "Observation of a Rapidly Pulsating Radio Source". Nature 217 (5130): 709–713. Bibcode:1968Natur.217..709H. doi:10.1038/217709a0 Hewish, A.; et al. (1968). "Observation of a Rapidly Pulsating Radio Source". Nature 217 (5130): 709–713. Bibcode:1968Natur.217..709H. doi:10.1038/217709a0Hewish, A.NatureNature217Bibcode1968Natur.217..709Hdoi10.1038/217709a0  ^ Pilkington, J. D. H.; et al. (1968). "Observations of some further Pulsed Radio Sources". Nature 218 (5137): 126–129. Bibcode:1968Natur.218..126P. doi:10.1038/218126a0 ^^^Pilkington, J. D. H.; et al. (1968). "Observations of some further Pulsed Radio Sources". Nature 218 (5137): 126–129. Bibcode:1968Natur.218..126P. doi:10.1038/218126a0 Pilkington, J. D. H.; et al. (1968). "Observations of some further Pulsed Radio Sources". Nature 218 (5137): 126–129. Bibcode:1968Natur.218..126P. doi:10.1038/218126a0NatureNature218Bibcode1968Natur.218..126Pdoi10.1038/218126a0  ^ Hewish, A. (1970). "Pulsars". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 8 (1): 265–296. Bibcode:1970ARA&A...8..265H. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.08.090170.001405. ^^^Hewish, A. (1970). "Pulsars". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 8 (1): 265–296. Bibcode:1970ARA&A...8..265H. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.08.090170.001405. Hewish, A. (1970). "Pulsars". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 8 (1): 265–296. Bibcode:1970ARA&A...8..265H. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.08.090170.001405.Hewish, A.Annual Review of Astronomy and AstrophysicsAnnual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics8Bibcode1970ARA&A...8..265Hdoi10.1146/annurev.aa.08.090170.001405  ^ Newman, E. T.; et al. (1965). "Metric of a Rotating, Charged Mass". Journal of Mathematical Physics 6 (6): 918. Bibcode:1965JMP.....6..918N. doi:10.1063/1.1704351 ^^^Newman, E. T.; et al. (1965). "Metric of a Rotating, Charged Mass". Journal of Mathematical Physics 6 (6): 918. Bibcode:1965JMP.....6..918N. doi:10.1063/1.1704351 Newman, E. T.; et al. (1965). "Metric of a Rotating, Charged Mass". Journal of Mathematical Physics 6 (6): 918. Bibcode:1965JMP.....6..918N. doi:10.1063/1.1704351Newman, E. T.Journal of Mathematical PhysicsJournal of Mathematical Physics6Bibcode1965JMP.....6..918Ndoi10.1063/1.1704351  ^ Israel, W. (1967). "Event Horizons in Static Vacuum Space-Times". Physical Review 164 (5): 1776. Bibcode:1967PhRv..164.1776I. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.164.1776. ^^^Israel, W. (1967). "Event Horizons in Static Vacuum Space-Times". Physical Review 164 (5): 1776. Bibcode:1967PhRv..164.1776I. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.164.1776. Israel, W. (1967). "Event Horizons in Static Vacuum Space-Times". Physical Review 164 (5): 1776. Bibcode:1967PhRv..164.1776I. doi:10.1103/PhysRev.164.1776.Physical ReviewPhysical Review164Bibcode1967PhRv..164.1776Idoi10.1103/PhysRev.164.1776  ^ Carter, B. (1971). "Axisymmetric Black Hole Has Only Two Degrees of Freedom". Physical Review Letters 26 (6): 331. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26..331C. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.331. ^^^Carter, B. (1971). "Axisymmetric Black Hole Has Only Two Degrees of Freedom". Physical Review Letters 26 (6): 331. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26..331C. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.331. Carter, B. (1971). "Axisymmetric Black Hole Has Only Two Degrees of Freedom". Physical Review Letters 26 (6): 331. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26..331C. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.331.Carter, B.Physical Review LettersPhysical Review Letters26Bibcode1971PhRvL..26..331Cdoi10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.331  ^ Carter, B. (1977). "The vacuum black hole uniqueness theorem and its conceivable generalisations". Proceedings of the 1st Marcel Grossmann meeting on general relativity. pp. 243–254. ^^^Carter, B. (1977). "The vacuum black hole uniqueness theorem and its conceivable generalisations". Proceedings of the 1st Marcel Grossmann meeting on general relativity. pp. 243–254. Carter, B. (1977). "The vacuum black hole uniqueness theorem and its conceivable generalisations". Proceedings of the 1st Marcel Grossmann meeting on general relativity. pp. 243–254.Carter, B.Proceedings of the 1st Marcel Grossmann meeting on general relativity  ^ Robinson, D. (1975). "Uniqueness of the Kerr Black Hole". Physical Review Letters 34 (14): 905. Bibcode:1975PhRvL..34..905R. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.34.905. ^^^Robinson, D. (1975). "Uniqueness of the Kerr Black Hole". Physical Review Letters 34 (14): 905. Bibcode:1975PhRvL..34..905R. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.34.905. Robinson, D. (1975). "Uniqueness of the Kerr Black Hole". Physical Review Letters 34 (14): 905. Bibcode:1975PhRvL..34..905R. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.34.905.Physical Review LettersPhysical Review Letters34Bibcode1975PhRvL..34..905Rdoi10.1103/PhysRevLett.34.905  ^ a b Heusler, M. (1998). "Stationary Black Holes: Uniqueness and Beyond". Living Reviews in Relativity 1 (6). doi:10.12942/lrr-1998-6. Archived from the original on 1999-02-03. Retrieved 2011-02-08. ^ a baaaabbbbHeusler, M. (1998). "Stationary Black Holes: Uniqueness and Beyond". Living Reviews in Relativity 1 (6). doi:10.12942/lrr-1998-6. Archived from the original on 1999-02-03. Retrieved 2011-02-08. Heusler, M. (1998). "Stationary Black Holes: Uniqueness and Beyond". Living Reviews in Relativity 1 (6). doi:10.12942/lrr-1998-6. Archived from the original on 1999-02-03. Retrieved 2011-02-08."Stationary Black Holes: Uniqueness and Beyond"Living Reviews in Relativity1doi10.12942/lrr-1998-6the original. Retrieved 2011-02-082011-02-08  ^ a b Penrose, R. (1965). "Gravitational Collapse and Space-Time Singularities". Physical Review Letters 14 (3): 57. Bibcode:1965PhRvL..14...57P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.14.57. ^ a baaaabbbbPenrose, R. (1965). "Gravitational Collapse and Space-Time Singularities". Physical Review Letters 14 (3): 57. Bibcode:1965PhRvL..14...57P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.14.57. Penrose, R. (1965). "Gravitational Collapse and Space-Time Singularities". Physical Review Letters 14 (3): 57. Bibcode:1965PhRvL..14...57P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.14.57.Penrose, R.Physical Review LettersPhysical Review Letters14Bibcode1965PhRvL..14...57Pdoi10.1103/PhysRevLett.14.57  ^ Ford, L. H. (2003). "The Classical Singularity Theorems and Their Quantum Loopholes". International Journal of Theoretical Physics 42 (6): 1219. doi:10.1023/A:1025754515197. ^^^Ford, L. H. (2003). "The Classical Singularity Theorems and Their Quantum Loopholes". International Journal of Theoretical Physics 42 (6): 1219. doi:10.1023/A:1025754515197. Ford, L. H. (2003). "The Classical Singularity Theorems and Their Quantum Loopholes". International Journal of Theoretical Physics 42 (6): 1219. doi:10.1023/A:1025754515197.International Journal of Theoretical PhysicsInternational Journal of Theoretical Physics42doi10.1023/A:1025754515197  ^ Bardeen, J. M.; Carter, B.; Hawking, S. W. (1973). "The four laws of black hole mechanics". Communications in Mathematical Physics 31 (2): 161–170. Bibcode:1973CMaPh..31..161B. doi:10.1007/BF01645742. MR MR0334798. Zbl 1125.83309. ^^^Bardeen, J. M.; Carter, B.; Hawking, S. W. (1973). "The four laws of black hole mechanics". Communications in Mathematical Physics 31 (2): 161–170. Bibcode:1973CMaPh..31..161B. doi:10.1007/BF01645742. MR MR0334798. Zbl 1125.83309. Bardeen, J. M.; Carter, B.; Hawking, S. W. (1973). "The four laws of black hole mechanics". Communications in Mathematical Physics 31 (2): 161–170. Bibcode:1973CMaPh..31..161B. doi:10.1007/BF01645742. MR MR0334798. Zbl 1125.83309.Bardeen, J. M.Carter, B.Hawking, S. W.Communications in Mathematical PhysicsCommunications in Mathematical Physics31Bibcode1973CMaPh..31..161Bdoi10.1007/BF01645742MRMR0334798Zbl1125.83309  ^ a b c Hawking, S. W. (1974). "Black hole explosions?". Nature 248 (5443): 30–31. Bibcode:1974Natur.248...30H. doi:10.1038/248030a0. ^ a b caaaabbbbccccHawking, S. W. (1974). "Black hole explosions?". Nature 248 (5443): 30–31. Bibcode:1974Natur.248...30H. doi:10.1038/248030a0. Hawking, S. W. (1974). "Black hole explosions?". Nature 248 (5443): 30–31. Bibcode:1974Natur.248...30H. doi:10.1038/248030a0.Hawking, S. W.Nature248Bibcode1974Natur.248...30Hdoi10.1038/248030a0  ^ Quinion, M. (26 April 2008). "Black Hole". World Wide Words. Retrieved 2008-06-17. ^^^Quinion, M. (26 April 2008). "Black Hole". World Wide Words. Retrieved 2008-06-17. Quinion, M. (26 April 2008). "Black Hole". World Wide Words. Retrieved 2008-06-17.Quinion, M."Black Hole"World Wide WordsWorld Wide Words. Retrieved 2008-06-172008-06-17  ^ Carroll 2004, p. 253^^^Carroll 2004, p. 253Carroll 2004^ Thorne, K. S.; Price, R. H. (1986). Black holes: the membrane paradigm. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-03770-8. ^^^Thorne, K. S.; Price, R. H. (1986). Black holes: the membrane paradigm. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-03770-8. Thorne, K. S.; Price, R. H. (1986). Black holes: the membrane paradigm. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-03770-8.Thorne, K. S.Price, R. H.Black holes: the membrane paradigmISBN978-0-300-03770-8  ^ Anderson, Warren G. (1996). "The Black Hole Information Loss Problem". Usenet Physics FAQ. Retrieved 2009-03-24. ^^^Anderson, Warren G. (1996). "The Black Hole Information Loss Problem". Usenet Physics FAQ. Retrieved 2009-03-24. Anderson, Warren G. (1996). "The Black Hole Information Loss Problem". Usenet Physics FAQ. Retrieved 2009-03-24."The Black Hole Information Loss Problem"Usenet Physics FAQ. Retrieved 2009-03-242009-03-24  ^ Preskill, J. (1994-10-21). Black holes and information: A crisis in quantum physics (PDF). Caltech Theory Seminar. ^^^Preskill, J. (1994-10-21). Black holes and information: A crisis in quantum physics (PDF). Caltech Theory Seminar. Preskill, J. (1994-10-21). Black holes and information: A crisis in quantum physics (PDF). Caltech Theory Seminar.Preskill, J.Black holes and information: A crisis in quantum physicsBlack holes and information: A crisis in quantum physics(PDF)  ^ Hawking & Ellis 1973, Appendix B^^^Hawking & Ellis 1973, Appendix BHawking & Ellis 1973^ Seeds, Michael A.; Backman, Dana E. (2007). Perspectives on Astronomy. Cengage Learning. p. 167. ISBN 0-495-11352-2 ^^^Seeds, Michael A.; Backman, Dana E. (2007). Perspectives on Astronomy. Cengage Learning. p. 167. ISBN 0-495-11352-2 Seeds, Michael A.; Backman, Dana E. (2007). Perspectives on Astronomy. Cengage Learning. p. 167. ISBN 0-495-11352-2Perspectives on AstronomyPerspectives on AstronomyISBN0-495-11352-2  ^ Shapiro, S. L.; Teukolsky, S. A. (1983). Black holes, white dwarfs, and neutron stars: the physics of compact objects. John Wiley and Sons. p. 357. ISBN 0-471-87316-0. ^^^Shapiro, S. L.; Teukolsky, S. A. (1983). Black holes, white dwarfs, and neutron stars: the physics of compact objects. John Wiley and Sons. p. 357. ISBN 0-471-87316-0. Shapiro, S. L.; Teukolsky, S. A. (1983). Black holes, white dwarfs, and neutron stars: the physics of compact objects. John Wiley and Sons. p. 357. ISBN 0-471-87316-0.Teukolsky, S. A.Black holes, white dwarfs, and neutron stars: the physics of compact objectsISBN0-471-87316-0  ^ Berger, B. K. (2002). "Numerical Approaches to Spacetime Singularities". Living Reviews in Relativity 5: 1. arXiv:gr-qc/0201056. Bibcode:2002LRR.....5....1B. doi:10.12942/lrr-2002-1. Retrieved 2007-08-04. ^^^Berger, B. K. (2002). "Numerical Approaches to Spacetime Singularities". Living Reviews in Relativity 5: 1. arXiv:gr-qc/0201056. Bibcode:2002LRR.....5....1B. doi:10.12942/lrr-2002-1. Retrieved 2007-08-04. Berger, B. K. (2002). "Numerical Approaches to Spacetime Singularities". Living Reviews in Relativity 5: 1. arXiv:gr-qc/0201056. Bibcode:2002LRR.....5....1B. doi:10.12942/lrr-2002-1. Retrieved 2007-08-04."Numerical Approaches to Spacetime Singularities"Living Reviews in Relativity5arXivgr-qc/0201056Bibcode2002LRR.....5....1Bdoi10.12942/lrr-2002-1. Retrieved 2007-08-042007-08-04  ^ McClintock, J. E.; Shafee, R.; Narayan, R.; Remillard, R. A.; Davis, S. W.; Li, L.-X. (2006). "The Spin of the Near-Extreme Kerr Black Hole GRS 1915+105". Astrophysical Journal 652 (1): 518–539. arXiv:astro-ph/0606076. Bibcode:2006ApJ...652..518M. doi:10.1086/508457. ^^^McClintock, J. E.; Shafee, R.; Narayan, R.; Remillard, R. A.; Davis, S. W.; Li, L.-X. (2006). "The Spin of the Near-Extreme Kerr Black Hole GRS 1915+105". Astrophysical Journal 652 (1): 518–539. arXiv:astro-ph/0606076. Bibcode:2006ApJ...652..518M. doi:10.1086/508457. McClintock, J. E.; Shafee, R.; Narayan, R.; Remillard, R. A.; Davis, S. W.; Li, L.-X. (2006). "The Spin of the Near-Extreme Kerr Black Hole GRS 1915+105". Astrophysical Journal 652 (1): 518–539. arXiv:astro-ph/0606076. Bibcode:2006ApJ...652..518M. doi:10.1086/508457.Astrophysical Journal652arXivastro-ph/0606076Bibcode2006ApJ...652..518Mdoi10.1086/508457  ^ Wald 1984, pp. 124–125^^^Wald 1984, pp. 124–125Wald 1984^ Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973, p. 848^^^Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973, p. 848Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973^ Wheeler 2007, p. 179^^^Wheeler 2007, p. 179Wheeler 2007^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 5.4 and 7.3^^^Carroll 2004, Ch. 5.4 and 7.3Carroll 2004^ Carroll 2004, p. 217^^^Carroll 2004, p. 217Carroll 2004^ Carroll 2004, p. 218^^^Carroll 2004, p. 218Carroll 2004^ "Inside a black hole". Knowing the universe and its secrets. Retrieved 2009-03-26. ^^^"Inside a black hole". Knowing the universe and its secrets. Retrieved 2009-03-26. "Inside a black hole". Knowing the universe and its secrets. Retrieved 2009-03-26."Inside a black hole"Knowing the universe and its secrets. Retrieved 2009-03-262009-03-26  ^ Carroll 2004, p. 222^^^Carroll 2004, p. 222Carroll 2004^ Emparan, R.; Reall, H. S. (2008). "Black Holes in Higher Dimensions". Living Reviews in Relativity 11 (6). arXiv:0801.3471. Bibcode:2008LRR....11....6E. doi:10.12942/lrr-2008-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10. ^^^Emparan, R.; Reall, H. S. (2008). "Black Holes in Higher Dimensions". Living Reviews in Relativity 11 (6). arXiv:0801.3471. Bibcode:2008LRR....11....6E. doi:10.12942/lrr-2008-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10. Emparan, R.; Reall, H. S. (2008). "Black Holes in Higher Dimensions". Living Reviews in Relativity 11 (6). arXiv:0801.3471. Bibcode:2008LRR....11....6E. doi:10.12942/lrr-2008-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10."Black Holes in Higher Dimensions"Living Reviews in Relativity11arXiv0801.3471Bibcode2008LRR....11....6Edoi10.12942/lrr-2008-6. Retrieved 2011-02-102011-02-10  ^ Obers, N. A. (2009). Papantonopoulos, Eleftherios, ed. "Black Holes in Higher-Dimensional Gravity". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 211–258. arXiv:0802.0519. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0. ^^^Obers, N. A. (2009). Papantonopoulos, Eleftherios, ed. "Black Holes in Higher-Dimensional Gravity". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 211–258. arXiv:0802.0519. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0. Obers, N. A. (2009). Papantonopoulos, Eleftherios, ed. "Black Holes in Higher-Dimensional Gravity". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 211–258. arXiv:0802.0519. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0.Lecture Notes in Physics769arXiv0802.0519doi10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6ISBN978-3-540-88459-0  ^ hawking & ellis 1973, Ch. 9.3^^^hawking & ellis 1973, Ch. 9.3hawking & ellis 1973^ Carroll 2004, p. 205^^^Carroll 2004, p. 205Carroll 2004^ Carroll 2004, pp. 264–265^^^Carroll 2004, pp. 264–265Carroll 2004^ Carroll 2004, p. 252^^^Carroll 2004, p. 252Carroll 2004^ Lewis, G. F.; Kwan, J. (2007). "No Way Back: Maximizing Survival Time Below the Schwarzschild Event Horizon". Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 24 (2): 46–52. arXiv:0705.1029. Bibcode:2007PASA...24...46L. doi:10.1071/AS07012. ^^^Lewis, G. F.; Kwan, J. (2007). "No Way Back: Maximizing Survival Time Below the Schwarzschild Event Horizon". Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 24 (2): 46–52. arXiv:0705.1029. Bibcode:2007PASA...24...46L. doi:10.1071/AS07012. Lewis, G. F.; Kwan, J. (2007). "No Way Back: Maximizing Survival Time Below the Schwarzschild Event Horizon". Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 24 (2): 46–52. arXiv:0705.1029. Bibcode:2007PASA...24...46L. doi:10.1071/AS07012.Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia24arXiv0705.1029Bibcode2007PASA...24...46Ldoi10.1071/AS07012  ^ Wheeler 2007, p. 182^^^Wheeler 2007, p. 182Wheeler 2007^ Carroll 2004, pp. 257–259 and 265–266^^^Carroll 2004, pp. 257–259 and 265–266Carroll 2004^ Droz, S.; Israel, W.; Morsink, S. M. (1996). "Black holes: the inside story". Physics World 9 (1): 34–37. Bibcode:1996PhyW....9...34D. ^^^Droz, S.; Israel, W.; Morsink, S. M. (1996). "Black holes: the inside story". Physics World 9 (1): 34–37. Bibcode:1996PhyW....9...34D. Droz, S.; Israel, W.; Morsink, S. M. (1996). "Black holes: the inside story". Physics World 9 (1): 34–37. Bibcode:1996PhyW....9...34D."Black holes: the inside story"Physics World9Bibcode1996PhyW....9...34D  ^ Carroll 2004, p. 266^^^Carroll 2004, p. 266Carroll 2004^ Poisson, E.; Israel, W. (1990). "Internal structure of black holes". Physical Review D 41 (6): 1796. Bibcode:1990PhRvD..41.1796P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.41.1796. ^^^Poisson, E.; Israel, W. (1990). "Internal structure of black holes". Physical Review D 41 (6): 1796. Bibcode:1990PhRvD..41.1796P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.41.1796. Poisson, E.; Israel, W. (1990). "Internal structure of black holes". Physical Review D 41 (6): 1796. Bibcode:1990PhRvD..41.1796P. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.41.1796.Physical Review D41Bibcode1990PhRvD..41.1796Pdoi10.1103/PhysRevD.41.1796  ^ Wald 1984, p. 212^^^Wald 1984, p. 212Wald 1984^ Hamade, R. (1996). "Black Holes and Quantum Gravity". Cambridge Relativity and Cosmology. University of Cambridge. Retrieved 2009-03-26. ^^^Hamade, R. (1996). "Black Holes and Quantum Gravity". Cambridge Relativity and Cosmology. University of Cambridge. Retrieved 2009-03-26. Hamade, R. (1996). "Black Holes and Quantum Gravity". Cambridge Relativity and Cosmology. University of Cambridge. Retrieved 2009-03-26."Black Holes and Quantum Gravity"Cambridge Relativity and Cosmology. Retrieved 2009-03-262009-03-26  ^ Palmer, D. "Ask an Astrophysicist: Quantum Gravity and Black Holes". NASA. Retrieved 2009-03-26. ^^^Palmer, D. "Ask an Astrophysicist: Quantum Gravity and Black Holes". NASA. Retrieved 2009-03-26. Palmer, D. "Ask an Astrophysicist: Quantum Gravity and Black Holes". NASA. Retrieved 2009-03-26."Ask an Astrophysicist: Quantum Gravity and Black Holes". Retrieved 2009-03-262009-03-26  ^ a b Nitta, Daisuke; Chiba, Takeshi; Sugiyama, Naoshi (September 2011). "Shadows of colliding black holes". Physical Review D 84 (6). arXiv:1106.2425. Bibcode:2011PhRvD..84f3008N. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.84.063008 ^ a baaaabbbbNitta, Daisuke; Chiba, Takeshi; Sugiyama, Naoshi (September 2011). "Shadows of colliding black holes". Physical Review D 84 (6). arXiv:1106.2425. Bibcode:2011PhRvD..84f3008N. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.84.063008 Nitta, Daisuke; Chiba, Takeshi; Sugiyama, Naoshi (September 2011). "Shadows of colliding black holes". Physical Review D 84 (6). arXiv:1106.2425. Bibcode:2011PhRvD..84f3008N. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.84.063008Physical Review D84arXiv1106.2425Bibcode2011PhRvD..84f3008Ndoi10.1103/PhysRevD.84.063008  ^ Nemiroff, R. J. (1993). "Visual distortions near a neutron star and black hole". American Journal of Physics 61 (7): 619. arXiv:astro-ph/9312003. Bibcode:1993AmJPh..61..619N. doi:10.1119/1.17224. ^^^Nemiroff, R. J. (1993). "Visual distortions near a neutron star and black hole". American Journal of Physics 61 (7): 619. arXiv:astro-ph/9312003. Bibcode:1993AmJPh..61..619N. doi:10.1119/1.17224. Nemiroff, R. J. (1993). "Visual distortions near a neutron star and black hole". American Journal of Physics 61 (7): 619. arXiv:astro-ph/9312003. Bibcode:1993AmJPh..61..619N. doi:10.1119/1.17224.American Journal of Physics61arXivastro-ph/9312003Bibcode1993AmJPh..61..619Ndoi10.1119/1.17224  ^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.6^^^Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.6Carroll 2004^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.7^^^Carroll 2004, Ch. 6.7Carroll 2004^ Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973^^^Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973Thorne, Misner & Wheeler 1973^ Einstein, A. (1939). "On A Stationary System With Spherical Symmetry Consisting of Many Gravitating Masses". Annals of Mathematics 40 (4): 922–936. doi:10.2307/1968902. JSTOR 1968902. ^^^Einstein, A. (1939). "On A Stationary System With Spherical Symmetry Consisting of Many Gravitating Masses". Annals of Mathematics 40 (4): 922–936. doi:10.2307/1968902. JSTOR 1968902. Einstein, A. (1939). "On A Stationary System With Spherical Symmetry Consisting of Many Gravitating Masses". Annals of Mathematics 40 (4): 922–936. doi:10.2307/1968902. JSTOR 1968902.Annals of Mathematics40doi10.2307/1968902JSTOR1968902  ^ Kerr, R. P. (2009). "The Kerr and Kerr-Schild metrics". In Wiltshire, D. L.; Visser, M.; Scott, S. M. The Kerr Spacetime. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:0706.1109. ISBN 978-0-521-88512-6. ^^^Kerr, R. P. (2009). "The Kerr and Kerr-Schild metrics". In Wiltshire, D. L.; Visser, M.; Scott, S. M. The Kerr Spacetime. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:0706.1109. ISBN 978-0-521-88512-6. Kerr, R. P. (2009). "The Kerr and Kerr-Schild metrics". In Wiltshire, D. L.; Visser, M.; Scott, S. M. The Kerr Spacetime. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:0706.1109. ISBN 978-0-521-88512-6.The Kerr SpacetimearXiv0706.1109ISBN978-0-521-88512-6  ^ Hawking, S. W.; Penrose, R. (January 1970). "The Singularities of Gravitational Collapse and Cosmology". Proceedings of the Royal Society A 314 (1519): 529–548. Bibcode:1970RSPSA.314..529H. doi:10.1098/rspa.1970.0021. JSTOR 2416467. ^^^Hawking, S. W.; Penrose, R. (January 1970). "The Singularities of Gravitational Collapse and Cosmology". Proceedings of the Royal Society A 314 (1519): 529–548. Bibcode:1970RSPSA.314..529H. doi:10.1098/rspa.1970.0021. JSTOR 2416467. Hawking, S. W.; Penrose, R. (January 1970). "The Singularities of Gravitational Collapse and Cosmology". Proceedings of the Royal Society A 314 (1519): 529–548. Bibcode:1970RSPSA.314..529H. doi:10.1098/rspa.1970.0021. JSTOR 2416467.Hawking, S. W.Penrose, R.Proceedings of the Royal Society AProceedings of the Royal Society A314Bibcode1970RSPSA.314..529Hdoi10.1098/rspa.1970.0021JSTOR2416467  ^ a b c Carroll 2004, Section 5.8^ a b caaaabbbbccccCarroll 2004, Section 5.8Carroll 2004^ a b c Rees, M. J.; Volonteri, M. (2007). "Massive black holes: formation and evolution". In Karas, V.; Matt, G. Black Holes from Stars to Galaxies—Across the Range of Masses. Cambridge University Press. pp. 51–58. arXiv:astro-ph/0701512. ISBN 978-0-521-86347-6. ^ a b caaaabbbbccccRees, M. J.; Volonteri, M. (2007). "Massive black holes: formation and evolution". In Karas, V.; Matt, G. Black Holes from Stars to Galaxies—Across the Range of Masses. Cambridge University Press. pp. 51–58. arXiv:astro-ph/0701512. ISBN 978-0-521-86347-6. Rees, M. J.; Volonteri, M. (2007). "Massive black holes: formation and evolution". In Karas, V.; Matt, G. Black Holes from Stars to Galaxies—Across the Range of Masses. Cambridge University Press. pp. 51–58. arXiv:astro-ph/0701512. ISBN 978-0-521-86347-6.Black Holes from Stars to Galaxies—Across the Range of MassesarXivastro-ph/0701512ISBN978-0-521-86347-6  ^ Penrose, R. (2002). "Gravitational Collapse: The Role of General Relativity" (PDF). General Relativity and Gravitation 34 (7): 1141. Bibcode:2002GReGr..34.1141P. doi:10.1023/A:1016578408204. ^^^Penrose, R. (2002). "Gravitational Collapse: The Role of General Relativity" (PDF). General Relativity and Gravitation 34 (7): 1141. Bibcode:2002GReGr..34.1141P. doi:10.1023/A:1016578408204. Penrose, R. (2002). "Gravitational Collapse: The Role of General Relativity" (PDF). General Relativity and Gravitation 34 (7): 1141. Bibcode:2002GReGr..34.1141P. doi:10.1023/A:1016578408204.Penrose, R."Gravitational Collapse: The Role of General Relativity"(PDF)General Relativity and Gravitation34Bibcode2002GReGr..34.1141Pdoi10.1023/A:1016578408204  ^ Carr, B. J. (2005). "Primordial Black Holes: Do They Exist and Are They Useful?". In Suzuki, H.; Yokoyama, J.; Suto, Y.; Sato, K. Inflating Horizon of Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology. Universal Academy Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0511743. ISBN 4-946443-94-0. ^^^Carr, B. J. (2005). "Primordial Black Holes: Do They Exist and Are They Useful?". In Suzuki, H.; Yokoyama, J.; Suto, Y.; Sato, K. Inflating Horizon of Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology. Universal Academy Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0511743. ISBN 4-946443-94-0. Carr, B. J. (2005). "Primordial Black Holes: Do They Exist and Are They Useful?". In Suzuki, H.; Yokoyama, J.; Suto, Y.; Sato, K. Inflating Horizon of Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology. Universal Academy Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0511743. ISBN 4-946443-94-0.Inflating Horizon of Particle Astrophysics and CosmologyarXivastro-ph/0511743ISBN4-946443-94-0  ^ Giddings, S. B.; Thomas, S. (2002). "High energy colliders as black hole factories: The end of short distance physics". Physical Review D 65 (5): 056010. arXiv:hep-ph/0106219. Bibcode:2002PhRvD..65e6010G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.65.056010. ^^^Giddings, S. B.; Thomas, S. (2002). "High energy colliders as black hole factories: The end of short distance physics". Physical Review D 65 (5): 056010. arXiv:hep-ph/0106219. Bibcode:2002PhRvD..65e6010G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.65.056010. Giddings, S. B.; Thomas, S. (2002). "High energy colliders as black hole factories: The end of short distance physics". Physical Review D 65 (5): 056010. arXiv:hep-ph/0106219. Bibcode:2002PhRvD..65e6010G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.65.056010.Physical Review D65arXivhep-ph/0106219Bibcode2002PhRvD..65e6010Gdoi10.1103/PhysRevD.65.056010  ^ Harada, T. (2006). "Is there a black hole minimum mass?". Physical Review D 74 (8): 084004. arXiv:gr-qc/0609055. Bibcode:2006PhRvD..74h4004H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.74.084004. ^^^Harada, T. (2006). "Is there a black hole minimum mass?". Physical Review D 74 (8): 084004. arXiv:gr-qc/0609055. Bibcode:2006PhRvD..74h4004H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.74.084004. Harada, T. (2006). "Is there a black hole minimum mass?". Physical Review D 74 (8): 084004. arXiv:gr-qc/0609055. Bibcode:2006PhRvD..74h4004H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.74.084004.Physical Review D74arXivgr-qc/0609055Bibcode2006PhRvD..74h4004Hdoi10.1103/PhysRevD.74.084004  ^ Arkani–Hamed, N.; Dimopoulos, S.; Dvali, G. (1998). "The hierarchy problem and new dimensions at a millimeter". Physics Letters B 429 (3–4): 263. arXiv:hep-ph/9803315. Bibcode:1998PhLB..429..263A. doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(98)00466-3. ^^^Arkani–Hamed, N.; Dimopoulos, S.; Dvali, G. (1998). "The hierarchy problem and new dimensions at a millimeter". Physics Letters B 429 (3–4): 263. arXiv:hep-ph/9803315. Bibcode:1998PhLB..429..263A. doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(98)00466-3. Arkani–Hamed, N.; Dimopoulos, S.; Dvali, G. (1998). "The hierarchy problem and new dimensions at a millimeter". Physics Letters B 429 (3–4): 263. arXiv:hep-ph/9803315. Bibcode:1998PhLB..429..263A. doi:10.1016/S0370-2693(98)00466-3.Physics Letters B429arXivhep-ph/9803315Bibcode1998PhLB..429..263Adoi10.1016/S0370-2693(98)00466-3  ^ LHC Safety Assessment Group. "Review of the Safety of LHC Collisions" (PDF). CERN. ^^^LHC Safety Assessment Group. "Review of the Safety of LHC Collisions" (PDF). CERN. LHC Safety Assessment Group. "Review of the Safety of LHC Collisions" (PDF). CERN."Review of the Safety of LHC Collisions"(PDF)  ^ Cavaglià, M. (2010). "Particle accelerators as black hole factories?". Einstein-Online (Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute)) 4: 1010. ^^^Cavaglià, M. (2010). "Particle accelerators as black hole factories?". Einstein-Online (Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute)) 4: 1010. Cavaglià, M. (2010). "Particle accelerators as black hole factories?". Einstein-Online (Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute)) 4: 1010."Particle accelerators as black hole factories?"Einstein-OnlineMax Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute)4  ^ Vesperini, E.; McMillan, S. L. W.; d'Ercole, A.; et al. (2010). "Intermediate-Mass Black Holes in Early Globular Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 713 (1): L41–L44. arXiv:1003.3470. Bibcode:2010ApJ...713L..41V. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/713/1/L41. ^^^Vesperini, E.; McMillan, S. L. W.; d'Ercole, A.; et al. (2010). "Intermediate-Mass Black Holes in Early Globular Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 713 (1): L41–L44. arXiv:1003.3470. Bibcode:2010ApJ...713L..41V. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/713/1/L41. Vesperini, E.; McMillan, S. L. W.; d'Ercole, A.; et al. (2010). "Intermediate-Mass Black Holes in Early Globular Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 713 (1): L41–L44. arXiv:1003.3470. Bibcode:2010ApJ...713L..41V. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/713/1/L41.The Astrophysical Journal Letters713arXiv1003.3470Bibcode2010ApJ...713L..41Vdoi10.1088/2041-8205/713/1/L41  ^ Zwart, S. F. P.; Baumgardt, H.; Hut, P.; et al. (2004). "Formation of massive black holes through runaway collisions in dense young star clusters". Nature 428 (6984): 724–6. arXiv:astro-ph/0402622. Bibcode:2004Natur.428..724P. doi:10.1038/nature02448. PMID 15085124. ^^^Zwart, S. F. P.; Baumgardt, H.; Hut, P.; et al. (2004). "Formation of massive black holes through runaway collisions in dense young star clusters". Nature 428 (6984): 724–6. arXiv:astro-ph/0402622. Bibcode:2004Natur.428..724P. doi:10.1038/nature02448. PMID 15085124. Zwart, S. F. P.; Baumgardt, H.; Hut, P.; et al. (2004). "Formation of massive black holes through runaway collisions in dense young star clusters". Nature 428 (6984): 724–6. arXiv:astro-ph/0402622. Bibcode:2004Natur.428..724P. doi:10.1038/nature02448. PMID 15085124.Nature428arXivastro-ph/0402622Bibcode2004Natur.428..724Pdoi10.1038/nature02448PMID15085124  ^ O'Leary, R. M.; Rasio, F. A.; Fregeau, J. M.; et al. (2006). "Binary Mergers and Growth of Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal 637 (2): 937. arXiv:astro-ph/0508224. Bibcode:2006ApJ...637..937O. doi:10.1086/498446. ^^^O'Leary, R. M.; Rasio, F. A.; Fregeau, J. M.; et al. (2006). "Binary Mergers and Growth of Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal 637 (2): 937. arXiv:astro-ph/0508224. Bibcode:2006ApJ...637..937O. doi:10.1086/498446. O'Leary, R. M.; Rasio, F. A.; Fregeau, J. M.; et al. (2006). "Binary Mergers and Growth of Black Holes in Dense Star Clusters". The Astrophysical Journal 637 (2): 937. arXiv:astro-ph/0508224. Bibcode:2006ApJ...637..937O. doi:10.1086/498446.The Astrophysical Journal637arXivastro-ph/0508224Bibcode2006ApJ...637..937Odoi10.1086/498446  ^ Page, D. N. (2005). "Hawking radiation and black hole thermodynamics". New Journal of Physics 7: 203. arXiv:hep-th/0409024. Bibcode:2005NJPh....7..203P. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/7/1/203. ^^^Page, D. N. (2005). "Hawking radiation and black hole thermodynamics". New Journal of Physics 7: 203. arXiv:hep-th/0409024. Bibcode:2005NJPh....7..203P. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/7/1/203. Page, D. N. (2005). "Hawking radiation and black hole thermodynamics". New Journal of Physics 7: 203. arXiv:hep-th/0409024. Bibcode:2005NJPh....7..203P. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/7/1/203.New Journal of Physics7arXivhep-th/0409024Bibcode2005NJPh....7..203Pdoi10.1088/1367-2630/7/1/203  ^ Carroll 2004, Ch. 9.6^^^Carroll 2004, Ch. 9.6Carroll 2004^ "Evaporating black holes?". Einstein online. Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics. 2010. Retrieved 2010-12-12. ^^^"Evaporating black holes?". Einstein online. Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics. 2010. Retrieved 2010-12-12. "Evaporating black holes?". Einstein online. Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics. 2010. Retrieved 2010-12-12."Evaporating black holes?"Einstein online. Retrieved 2010-12-122010-12-12  ^ Giddings, S. B.; Mangano, M. L. (2008). "Astrophysical implications of hypothetical stable TeV-scale black holes". Physical Review D 78 (3): 035009. arXiv:0806.3381. Bibcode:2008PhRvD..78c5009G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.78.035009. ^^^Giddings, S. B.; Mangano, M. L. (2008). "Astrophysical implications of hypothetical stable TeV-scale black holes". Physical Review D 78 (3): 035009. arXiv:0806.3381. Bibcode:2008PhRvD..78c5009G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.78.035009. Giddings, S. B.; Mangano, M. L. (2008). "Astrophysical implications of hypothetical stable TeV-scale black holes". Physical Review D 78 (3): 035009. arXiv:0806.3381. Bibcode:2008PhRvD..78c5009G. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.78.035009.Physical Review D78arXiv0806.3381Bibcode2008PhRvD..78c5009Gdoi10.1103/PhysRevD.78.035009  ^ Peskin, M. E. (2008). "The end of the world at the Large Hadron Collider?". Physics 1: 14. Bibcode:2008PhyOJ...1...14P. doi:10.1103/Physics.1.14. ^^^Peskin, M. E. (2008). "The end of the world at the Large Hadron Collider?". Physics 1: 14. Bibcode:2008PhyOJ...1...14P. doi:10.1103/Physics.1.14. Peskin, M. E. (2008). "The end of the world at the Large Hadron Collider?". Physics 1: 14. Bibcode:2008PhyOJ...1...14P. doi:10.1103/Physics.1.14.Physics1Bibcode2008PhyOJ...1...14Pdoi10.1103/Physics.1.14  ^ Fichtel, C. E.; Bertsch, D. L.; Dingus, B. L.; et al. (1994). "Search of the energetic gamma-ray experiment telescope (EGRET) data for high-energy gamma-ray microsecond bursts". Astrophysical Journal 434 (2): 557–559. Bibcode:1994ApJ...434..557F. doi:10.1086/174758. ^^^Fichtel, C. E.; Bertsch, D. L.; Dingus, B. L.; et al. (1994). "Search of the energetic gamma-ray experiment telescope (EGRET) data for high-energy gamma-ray microsecond bursts". Astrophysical Journal 434 (2): 557–559. Bibcode:1994ApJ...434..557F. doi:10.1086/174758. Fichtel, C. E.; Bertsch, D. L.; Dingus, B. L.; et al. (1994). "Search of the energetic gamma-ray experiment telescope (EGRET) data for high-energy gamma-ray microsecond bursts". Astrophysical Journal 434 (2): 557–559. Bibcode:1994ApJ...434..557F. doi:10.1086/174758.Astrophysical Journal434Bibcode1994ApJ...434..557Fdoi10.1086/174758  ^ Naeye, R. "Testing Fundamental Physics". NASA. Retrieved 2008-09-16. ^^^Naeye, R. "Testing Fundamental Physics". NASA. Retrieved 2008-09-16. Naeye, R. "Testing Fundamental Physics". NASA. Retrieved 2008-09-16."Testing Fundamental Physics". Retrieved 2008-09-162008-09-16  ^ "Ripped Apart by a Black Hole". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 19 July 2013. ^^^"Ripped Apart by a Black Hole". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 19 July 2013. "Ripped Apart by a Black Hole". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 19 July 2013."Ripped Apart by a Black Hole"ESO Press Release. Retrieved 19 July 201319 July  ^ O'Neill, Ian (2 July 2015). "Event Horizon Telescope Will Probe Spacetime's Mysteries". Discovery News. Retrieved 6 December 2015. ^^^O'Neill, Ian (2 July 2015). "Event Horizon Telescope Will Probe Spacetime's Mysteries". Discovery News. Retrieved 6 December 2015. O'Neill, Ian (2 July 2015). "Event Horizon Telescope Will Probe Spacetime's Mysteries". Discovery News. Retrieved 6 December 2015."Event Horizon Telescope Will Probe Spacetime's Mysteries"Discovery News. Retrieved 6 December 20156 December  ^ Johnson, M. D.; Fish, V. L.; Doeleman, S. S.; Marrone, D. P.; Plambeck, R. L.; Wardle, J. F. C.; Akiyama, K.; Asada, K.; Beaudoin, C. (2015-12-04). "Resolved magnetic-field structure and variability near the event horizon of Sagittarius A*". Science 350 (6265): 1242–1245. arXiv:1512.01220. Bibcode:2015Sci...350.1242J. doi:10.1126/science.aac7087. ISSN 0036-8075. ^^^Johnson, M. D.; Fish, V. L.; Doeleman, S. S.; Marrone, D. P.; Plambeck, R. L.; Wardle, J. F. C.; Akiyama, K.; Asada, K.; Beaudoin, C. (2015-12-04). "Resolved magnetic-field structure and variability near the event horizon of Sagittarius A*". Science 350 (6265): 1242–1245. arXiv:1512.01220. Bibcode:2015Sci...350.1242J. doi:10.1126/science.aac7087. ISSN 0036-8075. Johnson, M. D.; Fish, V. L.; Doeleman, S. S.; Marrone, D. P.; Plambeck, R. L.; Wardle, J. F. C.; Akiyama, K.; Asada, K.; Beaudoin, C. (2015-12-04). "Resolved magnetic-field structure and variability near the event horizon of Sagittarius A*". Science 350 (6265): 1242–1245. arXiv:1512.01220. Bibcode:2015Sci...350.1242J. doi:10.1126/science.aac7087. ISSN 0036-8075."Resolved magnetic-field structure and variability near the event horizon of Sagittarius A*"Science350arXiv1512.01220Bibcode2015Sci...350.1242Jdoi10.1126/science.aac7087ISSN0036-8075  ^ "Event Horizon Telescope Reveals Magnetic Fields at Milky Way's Central Black Hole". cfa.harvard.edu. 3 December 2015. Retrieved 12 January 2016. ^^^"Event Horizon Telescope Reveals Magnetic Fields at Milky Way's Central Black Hole". cfa.harvard.edu. 3 December 2015. Retrieved 12 January 2016. "Event Horizon Telescope Reveals Magnetic Fields at Milky Way's Central Black Hole". cfa.harvard.edu. 3 December 2015. Retrieved 12 January 2016."Event Horizon Telescope Reveals Magnetic Fields at Milky Way's Central Black Hole"cfa.harvard.edu. Retrieved 12 January 201612 January  ^ Overbye, Dennis (11 February 2016). "Physicists Detect Gravitational Waves, Proving Einstein Right". New York Times. Retrieved 11 February 2016. ^^^Overbye, Dennis (11 February 2016). "Physicists Detect Gravitational Waves, Proving Einstein Right". New York Times. Retrieved 11 February 2016. Overbye, Dennis (11 February 2016). "Physicists Detect Gravitational Waves, Proving Einstein Right". New York Times. Retrieved 11 February 2016.Overbye, Dennis"Physicists Detect Gravitational Waves, Proving Einstein Right"New York TimesNew York Times. Retrieved 11 February 201611 February  ^ Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Properties of the binary black hole merger GW150914". arXiv:1602.03840. ^^^Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Properties of the binary black hole merger GW150914". arXiv:1602.03840. Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Properties of the binary black hole merger GW150914". arXiv:1602.03840.arXiv1602.03840  ^ a b Cardoso, V., Franzin, E., and Pani, P. (2016). "Is the gravitational-wave ringdown a probe of the event horizon?". Physical Review Letters. arXiv:1602.07309. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)^ a baaaabbbbCardoso, V., Franzin, E., and Pani, P. (2016). "Is the gravitational-wave ringdown a probe of the event horizon?". Physical Review Letters. arXiv:1602.07309. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102.  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)Cardoso, V., Franzin, E., and Pani, P. (2016). "Is the gravitational-wave ringdown a probe of the event horizon?". Physical Review Letters. arXiv:1602.07309. Bibcode:2016PhRvL.116f1102A. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102.Physical Review LettersPhysical Review LettersarXiv1602.07309Bibcode2016PhRvL.116f1102Adoi10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.061102  CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)link^ Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Tests of general relativity with GW150914". LIGO. Retrieved 12 February 2016. ^^^Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Tests of general relativity with GW150914". LIGO. Retrieved 12 February 2016. Abbott, Benjamin P.; et al. (LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration) (11 February 2016). "Tests of general relativity with GW150914". LIGO. Retrieved 12 February 2016."Tests of general relativity with GW150914"LIGO. Retrieved 12 February 201612 February  ^ "Astrophysical Implications of the Binary Black Hole Merger GW150914". Astrophys. J. Lett. 818 (2): L22. arXiv:1602.03846. Bibcode:2016ApJ...818L..22A. doi:10.3847/2041-8205/818/2/L22. ^^^"Astrophysical Implications of the Binary Black Hole Merger GW150914". Astrophys. J. Lett. 818 (2): L22. arXiv:1602.03846. Bibcode:2016ApJ...818L..22A. doi:10.3847/2041-8205/818/2/L22. "Astrophysical Implications of the Binary Black Hole Merger GW150914". Astrophys. J. Lett. 818 (2): L22. arXiv:1602.03846. Bibcode:2016ApJ...818L..22A. doi:10.3847/2041-8205/818/2/L22."Astrophysical Implications of the Binary Black Hole Merger GW150914"Astrophys. J. Lett.818arXiv1602.03846Bibcode2016ApJ...818L..22Adoi10.3847/2041-8205/818/2/L22  ^ a b Gillessen, S.; Eisenhauer, F.; Trippe, S.; et al. (2009). "Monitoring Stellar Orbits around the Massive Black Hole in the Galactic Center". The Astrophysical Journal 692 (2): 1075. arXiv:0810.4674. Bibcode:2009ApJ...692.1075G. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/692/2/1075. ^ a baaaabbbbGillessen, S.; Eisenhauer, F.; Trippe, S.; et al. (2009). "Monitoring Stellar Orbits around the Massive Black Hole in the Galactic Center". The Astrophysical Journal 692 (2): 1075. arXiv:0810.4674. Bibcode:2009ApJ...692.1075G. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/692/2/1075. Gillessen, S.; Eisenhauer, F.; Trippe, S.; et al. (2009). "Monitoring Stellar Orbits around the Massive Black Hole in the Galactic Center". The Astrophysical Journal 692 (2): 1075. arXiv:0810.4674. Bibcode:2009ApJ...692.1075G. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/692/2/1075.The Astrophysical Journal692arXiv0810.4674Bibcode2009ApJ...692.1075Gdoi10.1088/0004-637X/692/2/1075  ^ a b Ghez, A. M.; Klein, B. L.; Morris, M.; et al. (1998). "High Proper‐Motion Stars in the Vicinity of Sagittarius A*: Evidence for a Supermassive Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy". The Astrophysical Journal 509 (2): 678. arXiv:astro-ph/9807210. Bibcode:1998ApJ...509..678G. doi:10.1086/306528. ^ a baaaabbbbGhez, A. M.; Klein, B. L.; Morris, M.; et al. (1998). "High Proper‐Motion Stars in the Vicinity of Sagittarius A*: Evidence for a Supermassive Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy". The Astrophysical Journal 509 (2): 678. arXiv:astro-ph/9807210. Bibcode:1998ApJ...509..678G. doi:10.1086/306528. Ghez, A. M.; Klein, B. L.; Morris, M.; et al. (1998). "High Proper‐Motion Stars in the Vicinity of Sagittarius A*: Evidence for a Supermassive Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy". The Astrophysical Journal 509 (2): 678. arXiv:astro-ph/9807210. Bibcode:1998ApJ...509..678G. doi:10.1086/306528.The Astrophysical Journal509arXivastro-ph/9807210Bibcode1998ApJ...509..678Gdoi10.1086/306528  ^ Broderick, Avery; Loeb, Abraham; Narayan, Ramesh (August 2009). "The Event Horizon of Sagittarius A*". The Astrophysical Journal 701: 1357. arXiv:0903.1105. Bibcode:2009ApJ...701.1357B. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/701/2/1357. ^^^Broderick, Avery; Loeb, Abraham; Narayan, Ramesh (August 2009). "The Event Horizon of Sagittarius A*". The Astrophysical Journal 701: 1357. arXiv:0903.1105. Bibcode:2009ApJ...701.1357B. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/701/2/1357. Broderick, Avery; Loeb, Abraham; Narayan, Ramesh (August 2009). "The Event Horizon of Sagittarius A*". The Astrophysical Journal 701: 1357. arXiv:0903.1105. Bibcode:2009ApJ...701.1357B. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/701/2/1357."The Event Horizon of Sagittarius A*"The Astrophysical Journal701arXiv0903.1105Bibcode2009ApJ...701.1357Bdoi10.1088/0004-637X/701/2/1357  ^ a b "NASA's NuSTAR Sees Rare Blurring of Black Hole Light". NASA. 12 August 2014. Retrieved 12 August 2014. ^ a baaaabbbb"NASA's NuSTAR Sees Rare Blurring of Black Hole Light". NASA. 12 August 2014. Retrieved 12 August 2014. "NASA's NuSTAR Sees Rare Blurring of Black Hole Light". NASA. 12 August 2014. Retrieved 12 August 2014."NASA's NuSTAR Sees Rare Blurring of Black Hole Light"NASANASA. Retrieved 12 August 201412 August  ^ "Short-cut method of solution of geodesic equations for Schwarzchild black hole", J.A. Marck, Class.Quant. Grav. 13 (1996) 393-402.^^^"Short-cut method of solution of geodesic equations for Schwarzchild black hole", J.A. Marck, Class.Quant. Grav. 13 (1996) 393-402.^ a b c McClintock, J. E.; Remillard, R. A. (2006). "Black Hole Binaries". In Lewin, W.; van der Klis, M. Compact Stellar X-ray Sources. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0306213. ISBN 0-521-82659-4.  section 4.1.5.^ a b caaaabbbbccccMcClintock, J. E.; Remillard, R. A. (2006). "Black Hole Binaries". In Lewin, W.; van der Klis, M. Compact Stellar X-ray Sources. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0306213. ISBN 0-521-82659-4.  section 4.1.5.McClintock, J. E.; Remillard, R. A. (2006). "Black Hole Binaries". In Lewin, W.; van der Klis, M. Compact Stellar X-ray Sources. Cambridge University Press. arXiv:astro-ph/0306213. ISBN 0-521-82659-4.Compact Stellar X-ray SourcesarXivastro-ph/0306213ISBN0-521-82659-4  ^ a b c d e f g h i Celotti, A.; Miller, J. C.; Sciama, D. W. (1999). "Astrophysical evidence for the existence of black holes". Classical and Quantum Gravity 16 (12A): A3–A21. arXiv:astro-ph/9912186. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/16/12A/301. ^ a b c d e f g h iaaaabbbbccccddddeeeeffffgggghhhhiiiiCelotti, A.; Miller, J. C.; Sciama, D. W. (1999). "Astrophysical evidence for the existence of black holes". Classical and Quantum Gravity 16 (12A): A3–A21. arXiv:astro-ph/9912186. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/16/12A/301. Celotti, A.; Miller, J. C.; Sciama, D. W. (1999). "Astrophysical evidence for the existence of black holes". Classical and Quantum Gravity 16 (12A): A3–A21. arXiv:astro-ph/9912186. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/16/12A/301.Classical and Quantum Gravity16arXivastro-ph/9912186doi10.1088/0264-9381/16/12A/301  ^ Winter, L. M.; Mushotzky, R. F.; Reynolds, C. S. (2006). "XMM‐Newton Archival Study of the Ultraluminous X‐Ray Population in Nearby Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal 649 (2): 730. arXiv:astro-ph/0512480. Bibcode:2006ApJ...649..730W. doi:10.1086/506579. ^^^Winter, L. M.; Mushotzky, R. F.; Reynolds, C. S. (2006). "XMM‐Newton Archival Study of the Ultraluminous X‐Ray Population in Nearby Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal 649 (2): 730. arXiv:astro-ph/0512480. Bibcode:2006ApJ...649..730W. doi:10.1086/506579. Winter, L. M.; Mushotzky, R. F.; Reynolds, C. S. (2006). "XMM‐Newton Archival Study of the Ultraluminous X‐Ray Population in Nearby Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal 649 (2): 730. arXiv:astro-ph/0512480. Bibcode:2006ApJ...649..730W. doi:10.1086/506579.The Astrophysical Journal649arXivastro-ph/0512480Bibcode2006ApJ...649..730Wdoi10.1086/506579  ^ information@eso.org. "Hubble directly observes the disc around a black hole". www.spacetelescope.org. Retrieved 2016-03-07. ^^^information@eso.org. "Hubble directly observes the disc around a black hole". www.spacetelescope.org. Retrieved 2016-03-07. information@eso.org. "Hubble directly observes the disc around a black hole". www.spacetelescope.org. Retrieved 2016-03-07."Hubble directly observes the disc around a black hole"www.spacetelescope.org. Retrieved 2016-03-072016-03-07  ^ Muñoz, José A.; Mediavilla, Evencio; Kochanek, Christopher S.; Falco, Emilio; Mosquera, Ana María (2011-12-01). "A Study of Gravitational Lens Chromaticity with the Hubble Space Telescope". The Astrophysical Journal 742 (2): 67. arXiv:1107.5932. Bibcode:2011ApJ...742...67M. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/742/2/67. ISSN 0004-637X. ^^^Muñoz, José A.; Mediavilla, Evencio; Kochanek, Christopher S.; Falco, Emilio; Mosquera, Ana María (2011-12-01). "A Study of Gravitational Lens Chromaticity with the Hubble Space Telescope". The Astrophysical Journal 742 (2): 67. arXiv:1107.5932. Bibcode:2011ApJ...742...67M. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/742/2/67. ISSN 0004-637X. Muñoz, José A.; Mediavilla, Evencio; Kochanek, Christopher S.; Falco, Emilio; Mosquera, Ana María (2011-12-01). "A Study of Gravitational Lens Chromaticity with the Hubble Space Telescope". The Astrophysical Journal 742 (2): 67. arXiv:1107.5932. Bibcode:2011ApJ...742...67M. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/742/2/67. ISSN 0004-637X.The Astrophysical Journal742arXiv1107.5932Bibcode2011ApJ...742...67Mdoi10.1088/0004-637X/742/2/67ISSN0004-637X  ^ Bolton, C. T. (1972). "Identification of Cygnus X-1 with HDE 226868". Nature 235 (5336): 271–273. Bibcode:1972Natur.235..271B. doi:10.1038/235271b0. ^^^Bolton, C. T. (1972). "Identification of Cygnus X-1 with HDE 226868". Nature 235 (5336): 271–273. Bibcode:1972Natur.235..271B. doi:10.1038/235271b0. Bolton, C. T. (1972). "Identification of Cygnus X-1 with HDE 226868". Nature 235 (5336): 271–273. Bibcode:1972Natur.235..271B. doi:10.1038/235271b0.Nature235Bibcode1972Natur.235..271Bdoi10.1038/235271b0  ^ Webster, B. L.; Murdin, P. (1972). "Cygnus X-1—a Spectroscopic Binary with a Heavy Companion ?". Nature 235 (5332): 37–38. Bibcode:1972Natur.235...37W. doi:10.1038/235037a0. ^^^Webster, B. L.; Murdin, P. (1972). "Cygnus X-1—a Spectroscopic Binary with a Heavy Companion ?". Nature 235 (5332): 37–38. Bibcode:1972Natur.235...37W. doi:10.1038/235037a0. Webster, B. L.; Murdin, P. (1972). "Cygnus X-1—a Spectroscopic Binary with a Heavy Companion ?". Nature 235 (5332): 37–38. Bibcode:1972Natur.235...37W. doi:10.1038/235037a0.Nature235Bibcode1972Natur.235...37Wdoi10.1038/235037a0  ^ Rolston, B. (10 November 1997). "The First Black Hole". The bulletin. University of Toronto. Archived from the original on 2008-05-02. Retrieved 2008-03-11. ^^^Rolston, B. (10 November 1997). "The First Black Hole". The bulletin. University of Toronto. Archived from the original on 2008-05-02. Retrieved 2008-03-11. Rolston, B. (10 November 1997). "The First Black Hole". The bulletin. University of Toronto. Archived from the original on 2008-05-02. Retrieved 2008-03-11."The First Black Hole"The bulletinthe original. Retrieved 2008-03-112008-03-11  ^ Shipman, H. L.; Yu, Z; Du, Y.W (1 January 1975). "The implausible history of triple star models for Cygnus X-1 Evidence for a black hole". Astrophysical Letters 16 (1): 9–12. Bibcode:1975ApL....16....9S. doi:10.1016/S0304-8853(99)00384-4. ^^^Shipman, H. L.; Yu, Z; Du, Y.W (1 January 1975). "The implausible history of triple star models for Cygnus X-1 Evidence for a black hole". Astrophysical Letters 16 (1): 9–12. Bibcode:1975ApL....16....9S. doi:10.1016/S0304-8853(99)00384-4. Shipman, H. L.; Yu, Z; Du, Y.W (1 January 1975). "The implausible history of triple star models for Cygnus X-1 Evidence for a black hole". Astrophysical Letters 16 (1): 9–12. Bibcode:1975ApL....16....9S. doi:10.1016/S0304-8853(99)00384-4.Astrophysical Letters16Bibcode1975ApL....16....9Sdoi10.1016/S0304-8853(99)00384-4  ^ Narayan, R.; McClintock, J. (2008). "Advection-dominated accretion and the black hole event horizon". New Astronomy Reviews 51 (10–12): 733. arXiv:0803.0322. Bibcode:2008NewAR..51..733N. doi:10.1016/j.newar.2008.03.002. ^^^Narayan, R.; McClintock, J. (2008). "Advection-dominated accretion and the black hole event horizon". New Astronomy Reviews 51 (10–12): 733. arXiv:0803.0322. Bibcode:2008NewAR..51..733N. doi:10.1016/j.newar.2008.03.002. Narayan, R.; McClintock, J. (2008). "Advection-dominated accretion and the black hole event horizon". New Astronomy Reviews 51 (10–12): 733. arXiv:0803.0322. Bibcode:2008NewAR..51..733N. doi:10.1016/j.newar.2008.03.002.New Astronomy Reviews51arXiv0803.0322Bibcode2008NewAR..51..733Ndoi10.1016/j.newar.2008.03.002  ^ "NASA scientists identify smallest known black hole" (Press release). Goddard Space Flight Center. 2008-04-01. Retrieved 2009-03-14. ^^^"NASA scientists identify smallest known black hole" (Press release). Goddard Space Flight Center. 2008-04-01. Retrieved 2009-03-14. "NASA scientists identify smallest known black hole" (Press release). Goddard Space Flight Center. 2008-04-01. Retrieved 2009-03-14."NASA scientists identify smallest known black hole"Goddard Space Flight Center. Retrieved 2009-03-142009-03-14  ^ Krolik, J. H. (1999). Active Galactic Nuclei. Princeton University Press. Ch. 1.2. ISBN 0-691-01151-6. ^^^Krolik, J. H. (1999). Active Galactic Nuclei. Princeton University Press. Ch. 1.2. ISBN 0-691-01151-6. Krolik, J. H. (1999). Active Galactic Nuclei. Princeton University Press. Ch. 1.2. ISBN 0-691-01151-6.Active Galactic NucleiActive Galactic NucleiISBN0-691-01151-6  ^ Sparke, L. S.; Gallagher, J. S. (2000). Galaxies in the Universe: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press. Ch. 9.1. ISBN 0-521-59740-4. ^^^Sparke, L. S.; Gallagher, J. S. (2000). Galaxies in the Universe: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press. Ch. 9.1. ISBN 0-521-59740-4. Sparke, L. S.; Gallagher, J. S. (2000). Galaxies in the Universe: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press. Ch. 9.1. ISBN 0-521-59740-4.Galaxies in the Universe: An IntroductionGalaxies in the Universe: An IntroductionISBN0-521-59740-4  ^ Chou, Felicia; Anderson, Janet; Watzke, Megan (5 January 2015). "RELEASE 15-001 - NASA’s Chandra Detects Record-Breaking Outburst from Milky Way’s Black Hole". NASA. Retrieved 6 January 2015. ^^^Chou, Felicia; Anderson, Janet; Watzke, Megan (5 January 2015). "RELEASE 15-001 - NASA’s Chandra Detects Record-Breaking Outburst from Milky Way’s Black Hole". NASA. Retrieved 6 January 2015. Chou, Felicia; Anderson, Janet; Watzke, Megan (5 January 2015). "RELEASE 15-001 - NASA’s Chandra Detects Record-Breaking Outburst from Milky Way’s Black Hole". NASA. Retrieved 6 January 2015."RELEASE 15-001 - NASA’s Chandra Detects Record-Breaking Outburst from Milky Way’s Black Hole"NASANASA. Retrieved 6 January 20156 January  ^ Kormendy, J.; Richstone, D. (1995). "Inward Bound—The Search For Supermassive Black Holes In Galactic Nuclei". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 33 (1): 581–624. Bibcode:1995ARA&A..33..581K. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.33.090195.003053. ^^^Kormendy, J.; Richstone, D. (1995). "Inward Bound—The Search For Supermassive Black Holes In Galactic Nuclei". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 33 (1): 581–624. Bibcode:1995ARA&A..33..581K. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.33.090195.003053. Kormendy, J.; Richstone, D. (1995). "Inward Bound—The Search For Supermassive Black Holes In Galactic Nuclei". Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 33 (1): 581–624. Bibcode:1995ARA&A..33..581K. doi:10.1146/annurev.aa.33.090195.003053.Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics33Bibcode1995ARA&A..33..581Kdoi10.1146/annurev.aa.33.090195.003053  ^ King, A. (2003). "Black Holes, Galaxy Formation, and the MBH-σ Relation". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 596 (1): 27–29. arXiv:astro-ph/0308342. Bibcode:2003ApJ...596L..27K. doi:10.1086/379143. ^^^King, A. (2003). "Black Holes, Galaxy Formation, and the MBH-σ Relation". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 596 (1): 27–29. arXiv:astro-ph/0308342. Bibcode:2003ApJ...596L..27K. doi:10.1086/379143. King, A. (2003). "Black Holes, Galaxy Formation, and the MBH-σ Relation". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 596 (1): 27–29. arXiv:astro-ph/0308342. Bibcode:2003ApJ...596L..27K. doi:10.1086/379143.The Astrophysical Journal Letters596arXivastro-ph/0308342Bibcode2003ApJ...596L..27Kdoi10.1086/379143  ^ Ferrarese, L.; Merritt, D. (2000). "A Fundamental Relation Between Supermassive Black Holes and their Host Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 539 (1): 9–12. arXiv:astro-ph/0006053. Bibcode:2000ApJ...539L...9F. doi:10.1086/312838. ^^^Ferrarese, L.; Merritt, D. (2000). "A Fundamental Relation Between Supermassive Black Holes and their Host Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 539 (1): 9–12. arXiv:astro-ph/0006053. Bibcode:2000ApJ...539L...9F. doi:10.1086/312838. Ferrarese, L.; Merritt, D. (2000). "A Fundamental Relation Between Supermassive Black Holes and their Host Galaxies". The Astrophysical Journal Letters 539 (1): 9–12. arXiv:astro-ph/0006053. Bibcode:2000ApJ...539L...9F. doi:10.1086/312838.Merritt, D.The Astrophysical Journal Letters539arXivastro-ph/0006053Bibcode2000ApJ...539L...9Fdoi10.1086/312838  ^ "A Black Hole's Dinner is Fast Approaching". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 6 February 2012. ^^^"A Black Hole's Dinner is Fast Approaching". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 6 February 2012. "A Black Hole's Dinner is Fast Approaching". ESO Press Release. Retrieved 6 February 2012."A Black Hole's Dinner is Fast Approaching"ESO Press Release. Retrieved 6 February 20126 February  ^ a b Bozza, V. (2010). "Gravitational Lensing by Black Holes". General Relativity and Gravitation 42 (42): 2269–2300. arXiv:0911.2187. Bibcode:2010GReGr..42.2269B. doi:10.1007/s10714-010-0988-2. ^ a baaaabbbbBozza, V. (2010). "Gravitational Lensing by Black Holes". General Relativity and Gravitation 42 (42): 2269–2300. arXiv:0911.2187. Bibcode:2010GReGr..42.2269B. doi:10.1007/s10714-010-0988-2. Bozza, V. (2010). "Gravitational Lensing by Black Holes". General Relativity and Gravitation 42 (42): 2269–2300. arXiv:0911.2187. Bibcode:2010GReGr..42.2269B. doi:10.1007/s10714-010-0988-2.General Relativity and Gravitation42arXiv0911.2187Bibcode2010GReGr..42.2269Bdoi10.1007/s10714-010-0988-2  ^ Kovacs, Z.; Cheng, K. S.; Harko, T. (2009). "Can stellar mass black holes be quark stars?". Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 400 (3): 1632–1642. arXiv:0908.2672. Bibcode:2009MNRAS.400.1632K. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15571.x. ^^^Kovacs, Z.; Cheng, K. S.; Harko, T. (2009). "Can stellar mass black holes be quark stars?". Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 400 (3): 1632–1642. arXiv:0908.2672. Bibcode:2009MNRAS.400.1632K. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15571.x. Kovacs, Z.; Cheng, K. S.; Harko, T. (2009). "Can stellar mass black holes be quark stars?". Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 400 (3): 1632–1642. arXiv:0908.2672. Bibcode:2009MNRAS.400.1632K. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15571.x.Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical SocietyMonthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society400arXiv0908.2672Bibcode2009MNRAS.400.1632Kdoi10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15571.x  ^ Kusenko, A. (2006). "Properties and signatures of supersymmetric Q-balls". arXiv:hep-ph/0612159. ^^^Kusenko, A. (2006). "Properties and signatures of supersymmetric Q-balls". arXiv:hep-ph/0612159. Kusenko, A. (2006). "Properties and signatures of supersymmetric Q-balls". arXiv:hep-ph/0612159.arXivhep-ph/0612159  ^ Hansson, J.; Sandin, F. (2005). "Preon stars: a new class of cosmic compact objects". Physics Letters B 616 (1–2): 1. arXiv:astro-ph/0410417. Bibcode:2005PhLB..616....1H. doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2005.04.034. ^^^Hansson, J.; Sandin, F. (2005). "Preon stars: a new class of cosmic compact objects". Physics Letters B 616 (1–2): 1. arXiv:astro-ph/0410417. Bibcode:2005PhLB..616....1H. doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2005.04.034. Hansson, J.; Sandin, F. (2005). "Preon stars: a new class of cosmic compact objects". Physics Letters B 616 (1–2): 1. arXiv:astro-ph/0410417. Bibcode:2005PhLB..616....1H. doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2005.04.034.Physics Letters B616arXivastro-ph/0410417Bibcode2005PhLB..616....1Hdoi10.1016/j.physletb.2005.04.034  ^ Kiefer, C. (2006). "Quantum gravity: general introduction and recent developments". Annalen der Physik 15 (1–2): 129. arXiv:gr-qc/0508120. Bibcode:2006AnP...518..129K. doi:10.1002/andp.200510175. ^^^Kiefer, C. (2006). "Quantum gravity: general introduction and recent developments". Annalen der Physik 15 (1–2): 129. arXiv:gr-qc/0508120. Bibcode:2006AnP...518..129K. doi:10.1002/andp.200510175. Kiefer, C. (2006). "Quantum gravity: general introduction and recent developments". Annalen der Physik 15 (1–2): 129. arXiv:gr-qc/0508120. Bibcode:2006AnP...518..129K. doi:10.1002/andp.200510175.Annalen der Physik15arXivgr-qc/0508120Bibcode2006AnP...518..129Kdoi10.1002/andp.200510175  ^ "[NKS, Mathur states, 't Hooft-Polyakov monopoles, and Ward-Takahashi identities] - A New Kind of Science: The NKS Forum". wolframscience.com. Retrieved 12 April 2015. ^^^"[NKS, Mathur states, 't Hooft-Polyakov monopoles, and Ward-Takahashi identities] - A New Kind of Science: The NKS Forum". wolframscience.com. Retrieved 12 April 2015. "[NKS, Mathur states, 't Hooft-Polyakov monopoles, and Ward-Takahashi identities] - A New Kind of Science: The NKS Forum". wolframscience.com. Retrieved 12 April 2015."[NKS, Mathur states, 't Hooft-Polyakov monopoles, and Ward-Takahashi identities] - A New Kind of Science: The NKS Forum"wolframscience.com. Retrieved 12 April 201512 April  ^ Skenderis, K.; Taylor, M. (2008). "The fuzzball proposal for black holes". Physics Reports 467 (4–5): 117. arXiv:0804.0552. Bibcode:2008PhR...467..117S. doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2008.08.001. ^^^Skenderis, K.; Taylor, M. (2008). "The fuzzball proposal for black holes". Physics Reports 467 (4–5): 117. arXiv:0804.0552. Bibcode:2008PhR...467..117S. doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2008.08.001. Skenderis, K.; Taylor, M. (2008). "The fuzzball proposal for black holes". Physics Reports 467 (4–5): 117. arXiv:0804.0552. Bibcode:2008PhR...467..117S. doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2008.08.001.Physics Reports467arXiv0804.0552Bibcode2008PhR...467..117Sdoi10.1016/j.physrep.2008.08.001  ^ Hawking, S. W. (1971). "Gravitational Radiation from Colliding Black Holes". Physical Review Letters 26 (21): 1344–1346. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26.1344H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.1344. ^^^Hawking, S. W. (1971). "Gravitational Radiation from Colliding Black Holes". Physical Review Letters 26 (21): 1344–1346. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26.1344H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.1344. Hawking, S. W. (1971). "Gravitational Radiation from Colliding Black Holes". Physical Review Letters 26 (21): 1344–1346. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26.1344H. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.1344.Physical Review Letters26Bibcode1971PhRvL..26.1344Hdoi10.1103/PhysRevLett.26.1344  ^ a b Wald, R. M. (2001). "The Thermodynamics of Black Holes". Living Reviews in Relativity 4: 6. arXiv:gr-qc/9912119. Bibcode:2001LRR.....4....6W. doi:10.12942/lrr-2001-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10. ^ a baaaabbbbWald, R. M. (2001). "The Thermodynamics of Black Holes". Living Reviews in Relativity 4: 6. arXiv:gr-qc/9912119. Bibcode:2001LRR.....4....6W. doi:10.12942/lrr-2001-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10. Wald, R. M. (2001). "The Thermodynamics of Black Holes". Living Reviews in Relativity 4: 6. arXiv:gr-qc/9912119. Bibcode:2001LRR.....4....6W. doi:10.12942/lrr-2001-6. Retrieved 2011-02-10."The Thermodynamics of Black Holes"Living Reviews in Relativity4arXivgr-qc/9912119Bibcode2001LRR.....4....6Wdoi10.12942/lrr-2001-6. Retrieved 2011-02-102011-02-10  ^ 't Hooft, G. (2001). "The Holographic Principle". In Zichichi, A. Basics and highlights in fundamental physics. Subnuclear series 37. World Scientific. arXiv:hep-th/0003004. ISBN 978-981-02-4536-8. ^^^'t Hooft, G. (2001). "The Holographic Principle". In Zichichi, A. Basics and highlights in fundamental physics. Subnuclear series 37. World Scientific. arXiv:hep-th/0003004. ISBN 978-981-02-4536-8. 't Hooft, G. (2001). "The Holographic Principle". In Zichichi, A. Basics and highlights in fundamental physics. Subnuclear series 37. World Scientific. arXiv:hep-th/0003004. ISBN 978-981-02-4536-8.Basics and highlights in fundamental physics37arXivhep-th/0003004ISBN978-981-02-4536-8  ^ Strominger, A.; Vafa, C. (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379 (1–4): 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0. ^^^Strominger, A.; Vafa, C. (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379 (1–4): 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0. Strominger, A.; Vafa, C. (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379 (1–4): 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0.Physics Letters B379arXivhep-th/9601029Bibcode1996PhLB..379...99Sdoi10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0  ^ Carlip, S. (2009). "Black Hole Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 89. arXiv:0807.4520. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6_3. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0. ^^^Carlip, S. (2009). "Black Hole Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 89. arXiv:0807.4520. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6_3. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0. Carlip, S. (2009). "Black Hole Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics". Lecture Notes in Physics. Lecture Notes in Physics 769: 89. arXiv:0807.4520. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6_3. ISBN 978-3-540-88459-0.Lecture Notes in Physics769arXiv0807.4520doi10.1007/978-3-540-88460-6_3ISBN978-3-540-88459-0  ^ Hawking, S. W. "Does God Play Dice?". www.hawking.org.uk. Retrieved 2009-03-14. ^^^Hawking, S. W. "Does God Play Dice?". www.hawking.org.uk. Retrieved 2009-03-14. Hawking, S. W. "Does God Play Dice?". www.hawking.org.uk. Retrieved 2009-03-14."Does God Play Dice?"www.hawking.org.uk. Retrieved 2009-03-142009-03-14  ^ Giddings, S. B. (1995). "The black hole information paradox". Particles, Strings and Cosmology. Johns Hopkins Workshop on Current Problems in Particle Theory 19 and the PASCOS Interdisciplinary Symposium 5. arXiv:hep-th/9508151. ^^^Giddings, S. B. (1995). "The black hole information paradox". Particles, Strings and Cosmology. Johns Hopkins Workshop on Current Problems in Particle Theory 19 and the PASCOS Interdisciplinary Symposium 5. arXiv:hep-th/9508151. Giddings, S. B. (1995). "The black hole information paradox". Particles, Strings and Cosmology. Johns Hopkins Workshop on Current Problems in Particle Theory 19 and the PASCOS Interdisciplinary Symposium 5. arXiv:hep-th/9508151.Particles, Strings and CosmologyarXivhep-th/9508151  ^ Mathur, S. D. (2011). The information paradox: conflicts and resolutions. XXV International Symposium on Lepton Photon Interactions at High Energies. arXiv:1201.2079. ^^^Mathur, S. D. (2011). The information paradox: conflicts and resolutions. XXV International Symposium on Lepton Photon Interactions at High Energies. arXiv:1201.2079. Mathur, S. D. (2011). The information paradox: conflicts and resolutions. XXV International Symposium on Lepton Photon Interactions at High Energies. arXiv:1201.2079.The information paradox: conflicts and resolutionsarXiv1201.2079  Further readingFurther reading
Popular reading
Popular reading
Ferguson, Kitty (1991). Black Holes in Space-Time. Watts Franklin. ISBN 0-531-12524-6. 
Hawking, Stephen (1988). A Brief History of Time. Bantam Books, Inc. ISBN 0-553-38016-8. 
Hawking, Stephen; Penrose, Roger (1996). The Nature of Space and Time. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-03791-4. 
Melia, Fulvio (2003). The Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy. Princeton U Press. ISBN 978-0-691-09505-9. 
Melia, Fulvio (2003). The Edge of Infinity. Supermassive Black Holes in the Universe. Cambridge U Press. ISBN 978-0-521-81405-8. 
Pickover, Clifford (1998). Black Holes: A Traveler's Guide. Wiley, John & Sons, Inc. ISBN 0-471-19704-1. 
Thorne, Kip S. (1994). Black Holes and Time Warps. Norton, W. W. & Company, Inc. ISBN 0-393-31276-3. 
Wheeler, J. Craig (2007). Cosmic Catastrophes (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-85714-7. 
Ferguson, Kitty (1991). Black Holes in Space-Time. Watts Franklin. ISBN 0-531-12524-6. Ferguson, Kitty (1991). Black Holes in Space-Time. Watts Franklin. ISBN 0-531-12524-6.Black Holes in Space-TimeISBN0-531-12524-6  Hawking, Stephen (1988). A Brief History of Time. Bantam Books, Inc. ISBN 0-553-38016-8. Hawking, Stephen (1988). A Brief History of Time. Bantam Books, Inc. ISBN 0-553-38016-8.Hawking, StephenA Brief History of TimeA Brief History of TimeISBN0-553-38016-8  Hawking, Stephen; Penrose, Roger (1996). The Nature of Space and Time. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-03791-4. Hawking, Stephen; Penrose, Roger (1996). The Nature of Space and Time. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-03791-4.Hawking, StephenPenrose, RogerThe Nature of Space and TimeThe Nature of Space and TimeISBN0-691-03791-4  Melia, Fulvio (2003). The Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy. Princeton U Press. ISBN 978-0-691-09505-9. Melia, Fulvio (2003). The Black Hole at the Center of Our Galaxy. Princeton U Press. ISBN 978-0-691-09505-9.Melia, FulvioThe Black Hole at the Center of Our GalaxyISBN978-0-691-09505-9  Melia, Fulvio (2003). The Edge of Infinity. Supermassive Black Holes in the Universe. Cambridge U Press. ISBN 978-0-521-81405-8. Melia, Fulvio (2003). The Edge of Infinity. Supermassive Black Holes in the Universe. Cambridge U Press. ISBN 978-0-521-81405-8.The Edge of Infinity. Supermassive Black Holes in the UniverseISBN978-0-521-81405-8  Pickover, Clifford (1998). Black Holes: A Traveler's Guide. Wiley, John & Sons, Inc. ISBN 0-471-19704-1. Pickover, Clifford (1998). Black Holes: A Traveler's Guide. Wiley, John & Sons, Inc. ISBN 0-471-19704-1.Black Holes: A Traveler's GuideISBN0-471-19704-1  Thorne, Kip S. (1994). Black Holes and Time Warps. Norton, W. W. & Company, Inc. ISBN 0-393-31276-3. Thorne, Kip S. (1994). Black Holes and Time Warps. Norton, W. W. & Company, Inc. ISBN 0-393-31276-3.Thorne, Kip S.Black Holes and Time WarpsBlack Holes and Time WarpsISBN0-393-31276-3  Wheeler, J. Craig (2007). Cosmic Catastrophes (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-85714-7. Wheeler, J. Craig (2007). Cosmic Catastrophes (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-85714-7.Cosmic CatastrophesISBN0-521-85714-7  
University textbooks and monographs
University textbooks and monographs
Carroll, Sean M. (2004). Spacetime and Geometry. Addison Wesley. ISBN 0-8053-8732-3. , the lecture notes on which the book was based are available for free from Sean Carroll's website.
Carter, B. (1973). "Black hole equilibrium states". In DeWitt, B. S.; DeWitt, C. Black Holes. 
Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan (1999). Mathematical Theory of Black Holes. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-850370-9. 
Frolov, V. P.; Novikov, I. D. (1998). "Black hole physics". 
Frolov, Valeri P.; Zelnikov, Andrei (2011). Introduction to Black Hole Physics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-969229-3. Zbl 1234.83001. 
Hawking, S. W.; Ellis, G. F. R. (1973). Large Scale Structure of space time. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-09906-4. 
Melia, Fulvio (2007). The Galactic Supermassive Black Hole. Princeton U Press. ISBN 978-0-691-13129-0. 
Misner, Charles; Thorne, Kip S.; Wheeler, John (1973). Gravitation. W. H. Freeman and Company. ISBN 0-7167-0344-0. 
Taylor, Edwin F.; Wheeler, John Archibald (2000). Exploring Black Holes. Addison Wesley Longman. ISBN 0-201-38423-X. 
Wald, Robert M. (1984). General Relativity. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-87033-5. 
Wald, Robert M. (1992). Space, Time, and Gravity: The Theory of the Big Bang and Black Holes. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-87029-4. 
Black holes Teviet Creighton, Richard H. Price Scholarpedia 3(1):4277. doi:10.4249/scholarpedia.4277
Carroll, Sean M. (2004). Spacetime and Geometry. Addison Wesley. ISBN 0-8053-8732-3. , the lecture notes on which the book was based are available for free from Sean Carroll's website.Carroll, Sean M. (2004). Spacetime and Geometry. Addison Wesley. ISBN 0-8053-8732-3.Spacetime and GeometryISBN0-8053-8732-3  websiteCarter, B. (1973). "Black hole equilibrium states". In DeWitt, B. S.; DeWitt, C. Black Holes. Carter, B. (1973). "Black hole equilibrium states". In DeWitt, B. S.; DeWitt, C. Black Holes.Carter, B.DeWitt, B. S.Black Holes  Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan (1999). Mathematical Theory of Black Holes. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-850370-9. Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan (1999). Mathematical Theory of Black Holes. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-850370-9.Chandrasekhar, SubrahmanyanMathematical Theory of Black HolesISBN0-19-850370-9  Frolov, V. P.; Novikov, I. D. (1998). "Black hole physics". Frolov, V. P.; Novikov, I. D. (1998). "Black hole physics".  Frolov, Valeri P.; Zelnikov, Andrei (2011). Introduction to Black Hole Physics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-969229-3. Zbl 1234.83001. Frolov, Valeri P.; Zelnikov, Andrei (2011). Introduction to Black Hole Physics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-969229-3. Zbl 1234.83001.Introduction to Black Hole PhysicsIntroduction to Black Hole PhysicsISBN978-0-19-969229-3Zbl1234.83001  Hawking, S. W.; Ellis, G. F. R. (1973). Large Scale Structure of space time. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-09906-4. Hawking, S. W.; Ellis, G. F. R. (1973). Large Scale Structure of space time. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-09906-4.Hawking, S. W.Large Scale Structure of space timeLarge Scale Structure of space timeISBN0-521-09906-4  Melia, Fulvio (2007). The Galactic Supermassive Black Hole. Princeton U Press. ISBN 978-0-691-13129-0. Melia, Fulvio (2007). The Galactic Supermassive Black Hole. Princeton U Press. ISBN 978-0-691-13129-0.Melia, FulvioThe Galactic Supermassive Black HoleISBN978-0-691-13129-0  Misner, Charles; Thorne, Kip S.; Wheeler, John (1973). Gravitation. W. H. Freeman and Company. ISBN 0-7167-0344-0. Misner, Charles; Thorne, Kip S.; Wheeler, John (1973). Gravitation. W. H. Freeman and Company. ISBN 0-7167-0344-0.Misner, CharlesThorne, Kip S.Wheeler, JohnGravitationISBN0-7167-0344-0  Taylor, Edwin F.; Wheeler, John Archibald (2000). Exploring Black Holes. Addison Wesley Longman. ISBN 0-201-38423-X. Taylor, Edwin F.; Wheeler, John Archibald (2000). Exploring Black Holes. Addison Wesley Longman. ISBN 0-201-38423-X.Wheeler, John ArchibaldExploring Black HolesISBN0-201-38423-X  Wald, Robert M. (1984). General Relativity. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-87033-5. Wald, Robert M. (1984). General Relativity. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-87033-5.Wald, Robert M.General RelativityGeneral RelativityISBN978-0-226-87033-5  Wald, Robert M. (1992). Space, Time, and Gravity: The Theory of the Big Bang and Black Holes. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-87029-4. Wald, Robert M. (1992). Space, Time, and Gravity: The Theory of the Big Bang and Black Holes. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-87029-4.Space, Time, and Gravity: The Theory of the Big Bang and Black HolesISBN0-226-87029-4  Black holes Teviet Creighton, Richard H. Price Scholarpedia 3(1):4277. doi:10.4249/scholarpedia.4277Black holesRichard H. PriceScholarpediadoi:10.4249/scholarpedia.4277
Review papers
Review papers
Gallo, Elena; Marolf, Donald (2009). "Resource Letter BH-2: Black Holes". American Journal of Physics 77 (4): 294. arXiv:0806.2316. Bibcode:2009AmJPh..77..294G. doi:10.1119/1.3056569. 
Hughes, Scott A. (2005). "Trust but verify: The case for astrophysical black holes". arXiv:hep-ph/0511217.  Lecture notes from 2005 SLAC Summer Institute.
Gallo, Elena; Marolf, Donald (2009). "Resource Letter BH-2: Black Holes". American Journal of Physics 77 (4): 294. arXiv:0806.2316. Bibcode:2009AmJPh..77..294G. doi:10.1119/1.3056569. Gallo, Elena; Marolf, Donald (2009). "Resource Letter BH-2: Black Holes". American Journal of Physics 77 (4): 294. arXiv:0806.2316. Bibcode:2009AmJPh..77..294G. doi:10.1119/1.3056569.American Journal of Physics77arXiv0806.2316Bibcode2009AmJPh..77..294Gdoi10.1119/1.3056569  Hughes, Scott A. (2005). "Trust but verify: The case for astrophysical black holes". arXiv:hep-ph/0511217.  Lecture notes from 2005 SLAC Summer Institute.Hughes, Scott A. (2005). "Trust but verify: The case for astrophysical black holes". arXiv:hep-ph/0511217.arXivhep-ph/0511217  SLACExternal linksExternal links


Find more about
Black hole
at Wikipedia's sister projects




Media from Commons



News stories from Wikinews



Quotations from Wikiquote



Source texts from Wikisource



Textbooks from Wikibooks



Learning resources from Wikiversity



Find more about
Black hole
at Wikipedia's sister projects


Find more about
Black hole
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Find more about
Black hole
at Wikipedia's sister projectsBlack holesister projects

Media from Commons
Media from CommonsMedia

News stories from Wikinews
News stories from WikinewsNews stories

Quotations from Wikiquote
Quotations from WikiquoteQuotations

Source texts from Wikisource
Source texts from WikisourceSource texts

Textbooks from Wikibooks
Textbooks from WikibooksTextbooks

Learning resources from Wikiversity
Learning resources from WikiversityLearning resources

Black Holes on In Our Time at the BBC. (listen now)
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Singularities and Black Holes" by Erik Curiel and Peter Bokulich.
Black Holes: Gravity's Relentless Pull—Interactive multimedia Web site about the physics and astronomy of black holes from the Space Telescope Science Institute
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on Black Holes
"Schwarzschild Geometry"
Advanced Mathematics of Black Hole Evaporation
Hubble site
Black Holes on In Our Time at the BBC. (listen now)Black HolesIn Our TimeIn Our TimeBBClisten nowStanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Singularities and Black Holes" by Erik Curiel and Peter Bokulich.Stanford Encyclopedia of PhilosophySingularities and Black HolesBlack Holes: Gravity's Relentless Pull—Interactive multimedia Web site about the physics and astronomy of black holes from the Space Telescope Science InstituteBlack Holes: Gravity's Relentless PullFrequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on Black HolesFrequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on Black Holes"Schwarzschild Geometry"Schwarzschild GeometryAdvanced Mathematics of Black Hole EvaporationAdvanced Mathematics of Black Hole EvaporationHubble siteHubble site
Videos
Videos
16-year-long study tracks stars orbiting Milky Way black hole
Movie of Black Hole Candidate from Max Planck Institute
Nature.com 2015-04-20 3D simulations of colliding black holes
Computer visualisation of the signal detected by LIGO
Two Black Holes Merge into One (based upon the signal GW150914
16-year-long study tracks stars orbiting Milky Way black hole16-year-long study tracks stars orbiting Milky Way black holeMovie of Black Hole Candidate from Max Planck InstituteMovie of Black Hole Candidate from Max Planck InstituteNature.com 2015-04-20 3D simulations of colliding black holesNature.com 2015-04-20 3D simulations of colliding black holesComputer visualisation of the signal detected by LIGOComputer visualisation of the signal detected by LIGOTwo Black Holes Merge into One (based upon the signal GW150914Two Black Holes Merge into One (based upon the signal GW150914







v
t
e


Black holes






Types



Schwarzschild
Rotating
Charged
Virtual
Binary











Size



Micro
Extremal

Electron


Stellar
Intermediate-mass
Supermassive
Quasar

Active galactic nucleus
Blazar
Large quasar group










Formation



Stellar evolution
Gravitational collapse
Neutron star

Related links


Compact star

Quark
Exotic


Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit
White dwarf

Related links


Supernova

Related links


Hypernova
Gamma-ray burst








Properties



Thermodynamics
Schwarzschild radius
M–sigma relation
Event horizon
Quasi-periodic oscillation
Photon sphere
Ergosphere
Hawking radiation
Penrose process
Blandford–Znajek process
Bondi accretion
Spaghettification
Gravitational lens








Models



Gravitational singularity

Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems


Primordial black hole
Gravastar
Dark star
Dark-energy star
Black star
Eternally collapsing object

Magnetospheric eternally collapsing object


Fuzzball
White hole
Naked singularity
Ring singularity
Immirzi parameter
Membrane paradigm
Kugelblitz
Wormhole
Quasi-star








Issues



No-hair theorem
Information paradox
Cosmic censorship
Alternative models
Holographic principle
Black hole complementarity
firewall (physics)
ER=EPR








Metrics



Schwarzschild
Kerr
Reissner–Nordström
Kerr–Newman








Lists



Black holes
Most massive
Quasars








Related



Timeline of black hole physics
Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer
Hypercompact stellar system
Black hole starship














v
t
e


Black holes






Types



Schwarzschild
Rotating
Charged
Virtual
Binary











Size



Micro
Extremal

Electron


Stellar
Intermediate-mass
Supermassive
Quasar

Active galactic nucleus
Blazar
Large quasar group










Formation



Stellar evolution
Gravitational collapse
Neutron star

Related links


Compact star

Quark
Exotic


Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit
White dwarf

Related links


Supernova

Related links


Hypernova
Gamma-ray burst








Properties



Thermodynamics
Schwarzschild radius
M–sigma relation
Event horizon
Quasi-periodic oscillation
Photon sphere
Ergosphere
Hawking radiation
Penrose process
Blandford–Znajek process
Bondi accretion
Spaghettification
Gravitational lens








Models



Gravitational singularity

Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems


Primordial black hole
Gravastar
Dark star
Dark-energy star
Black star
Eternally collapsing object

Magnetospheric eternally collapsing object


Fuzzball
White hole
Naked singularity
Ring singularity
Immirzi parameter
Membrane paradigm
Kugelblitz
Wormhole
Quasi-star








Issues



No-hair theorem
Information paradox
Cosmic censorship
Alternative models
Holographic principle
Black hole complementarity
firewall (physics)
ER=EPR








Metrics



Schwarzschild
Kerr
Reissner–Nordström
Kerr–Newman








Lists



Black holes
Most massive
Quasars








Related



Timeline of black hole physics
Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer
Hypercompact stellar system
Black hole starship












v
t
e


Black holes






Types



Schwarzschild
Rotating
Charged
Virtual
Binary











Size



Micro
Extremal

Electron


Stellar
Intermediate-mass
Supermassive
Quasar

Active galactic nucleus
Blazar
Large quasar group










Formation



Stellar evolution
Gravitational collapse
Neutron star

Related links


Compact star

Quark
Exotic


Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit
White dwarf

Related links


Supernova

Related links


Hypernova
Gamma-ray burst








Properties



Thermodynamics
Schwarzschild radius
M–sigma relation
Event horizon
Quasi-periodic oscillation
Photon sphere
Ergosphere
Hawking radiation
Penrose process
Blandford–Znajek process
Bondi accretion
Spaghettification
Gravitational lens








Models



Gravitational singularity

Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems


Primordial black hole
Gravastar
Dark star
Dark-energy star
Black star
Eternally collapsing object

Magnetospheric eternally collapsing object


Fuzzball
White hole
Naked singularity
Ring singularity
Immirzi parameter
Membrane paradigm
Kugelblitz
Wormhole
Quasi-star








Issues



No-hair theorem
Information paradox
Cosmic censorship
Alternative models
Holographic principle
Black hole complementarity
firewall (physics)
ER=EPR








Metrics



Schwarzschild
Kerr
Reissner–Nordström
Kerr–Newman








Lists



Black holes
Most massive
Quasars








Related



Timeline of black hole physics
Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer
Hypercompact stellar system
Black hole starship










v
t
e


Black holes






Types



Schwarzschild
Rotating
Charged
Virtual
Binary











Size



Micro
Extremal

Electron


Stellar
Intermediate-mass
Supermassive
Quasar

Active galactic nucleus
Blazar
Large quasar group










Formation



Stellar evolution
Gravitational collapse
Neutron star

Related links


Compact star

Quark
Exotic


Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit
White dwarf

Related links


Supernova

Related links


Hypernova
Gamma-ray burst








Properties



Thermodynamics
Schwarzschild radius
M–sigma relation
Event horizon
Quasi-periodic oscillation
Photon sphere
Ergosphere
Hawking radiation
Penrose process
Blandford–Znajek process
Bondi accretion
Spaghettification
Gravitational lens








Models



Gravitational singularity

Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems


Primordial black hole
Gravastar
Dark star
Dark-energy star
Black star
Eternally collapsing object

Magnetospheric eternally collapsing object


Fuzzball
White hole
Naked singularity
Ring singularity
Immirzi parameter
Membrane paradigm
Kugelblitz
Wormhole
Quasi-star








Issues



No-hair theorem
Information paradox
Cosmic censorship
Alternative models
Holographic principle
Black hole complementarity
firewall (physics)
ER=EPR








Metrics



Schwarzschild
Kerr
Reissner–Nordström
Kerr–Newman








Lists



Black holes
Most massive
Quasars








Related



Timeline of black hole physics
Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer
Hypercompact stellar system
Black hole starship








v
t
e


Black holes




v
t
e


Black holes


v
t
e


v
t
e
vvvttteeeBlack holesBlack holes


Types



Schwarzschild
Rotating
Charged
Virtual
Binary






Types


Schwarzschild
Rotating
Charged
Virtual
Binary




Schwarzschild
Rotating
Charged
Virtual
Binary


Schwarzschild
Rotating
Charged
Virtual
Binary
SchwarzschildSchwarzschildRotatingRotatingChargedChargedVirtualVirtualBinaryBinary




Size



Micro
Extremal

Electron


Stellar
Intermediate-mass
Supermassive
Quasar

Active galactic nucleus
Blazar
Large quasar group





Size


Micro
Extremal

Electron


Stellar
Intermediate-mass
Supermassive
Quasar

Active galactic nucleus
Blazar
Large quasar group






Micro
Extremal

Electron


Stellar
Intermediate-mass
Supermassive
Quasar

Active galactic nucleus
Blazar
Large quasar group




Micro
Extremal

Electron


Stellar
Intermediate-mass
Supermassive
Quasar

Active galactic nucleus
Blazar
Large quasar group


MicroMicroExtremal

Electron

Extremal
Electron
ElectronElectronStellarStellarIntermediate-massIntermediate-massSupermassiveSupermassiveQuasar

Active galactic nucleus
Blazar
Large quasar group

Quasar
Active galactic nucleus
Blazar
Large quasar group
Active galactic nucleusActive galactic nucleusBlazarBlazarLarge quasar groupLarge quasar group


Formation



Stellar evolution
Gravitational collapse
Neutron star

Related links


Compact star

Quark
Exotic


Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit
White dwarf

Related links


Supernova

Related links


Hypernova
Gamma-ray burst



Formation


Stellar evolution
Gravitational collapse
Neutron star

Related links


Compact star

Quark
Exotic


Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit
White dwarf

Related links


Supernova

Related links


Hypernova
Gamma-ray burst




Stellar evolution
Gravitational collapse
Neutron star

Related links


Compact star

Quark
Exotic


Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit
White dwarf

Related links


Supernova

Related links


Hypernova
Gamma-ray burst


Stellar evolution
Gravitational collapse
Neutron star

Related links


Compact star

Quark
Exotic


Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit
White dwarf

Related links


Supernova

Related links


Hypernova
Gamma-ray burst
Stellar evolutionStellar evolutionGravitational collapseGravitational collapseNeutron star

Related links

Neutron star
Related links
Related linksRelated linksCompact star

Quark
Exotic

Compact star
Quark
Exotic
QuarkQuarkExoticExoticTolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limitTolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limitWhite dwarf

Related links

White dwarf
Related links
Related linksRelated linksSupernova

Related links

Supernova
Related links
Related linksRelated linksHypernovaHypernovaGamma-ray burstGamma-ray burst


Properties



Thermodynamics
Schwarzschild radius
M–sigma relation
Event horizon
Quasi-periodic oscillation
Photon sphere
Ergosphere
Hawking radiation
Penrose process
Blandford–Znajek process
Bondi accretion
Spaghettification
Gravitational lens



Properties


Thermodynamics
Schwarzschild radius
M–sigma relation
Event horizon
Quasi-periodic oscillation
Photon sphere
Ergosphere
Hawking radiation
Penrose process
Blandford–Znajek process
Bondi accretion
Spaghettification
Gravitational lens




Thermodynamics
Schwarzschild radius
M–sigma relation
Event horizon
Quasi-periodic oscillation
Photon sphere
Ergosphere
Hawking radiation
Penrose process
Blandford–Znajek process
Bondi accretion
Spaghettification
Gravitational lens


Thermodynamics
Schwarzschild radius
M–sigma relation
Event horizon
Quasi-periodic oscillation
Photon sphere
Ergosphere
Hawking radiation
Penrose process
Blandford–Znajek process
Bondi accretion
Spaghettification
Gravitational lens
ThermodynamicsThermodynamicsSchwarzschild radiusSchwarzschild radiusM–sigma relationM–sigma relationEvent horizonEvent horizonQuasi-periodic oscillationQuasi-periodic oscillationPhoton spherePhoton sphereErgosphereErgosphereHawking radiationHawking radiationPenrose processPenrose processBlandford–Znajek processBlandford–Znajek processBondi accretionBondi accretionSpaghettificationSpaghettificationGravitational lensGravitational lens


Models



Gravitational singularity

Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems


Primordial black hole
Gravastar
Dark star
Dark-energy star
Black star
Eternally collapsing object

Magnetospheric eternally collapsing object


Fuzzball
White hole
Naked singularity
Ring singularity
Immirzi parameter
Membrane paradigm
Kugelblitz
Wormhole
Quasi-star



Models


Gravitational singularity

Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems


Primordial black hole
Gravastar
Dark star
Dark-energy star
Black star
Eternally collapsing object

Magnetospheric eternally collapsing object


Fuzzball
White hole
Naked singularity
Ring singularity
Immirzi parameter
Membrane paradigm
Kugelblitz
Wormhole
Quasi-star




Gravitational singularity

Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems


Primordial black hole
Gravastar
Dark star
Dark-energy star
Black star
Eternally collapsing object

Magnetospheric eternally collapsing object


Fuzzball
White hole
Naked singularity
Ring singularity
Immirzi parameter
Membrane paradigm
Kugelblitz
Wormhole
Quasi-star


Gravitational singularity

Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems


Primordial black hole
Gravastar
Dark star
Dark-energy star
Black star
Eternally collapsing object

Magnetospheric eternally collapsing object


Fuzzball
White hole
Naked singularity
Ring singularity
Immirzi parameter
Membrane paradigm
Kugelblitz
Wormhole
Quasi-star
Gravitational singularity

Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems

Gravitational singularity
Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems
Penrose–Hawking singularity theoremsPenrose–Hawking singularity theoremsPrimordial black holePrimordial black holeGravastarGravastarDark starDark starDark-energy starDark-energy starBlack starBlack starEternally collapsing object

Magnetospheric eternally collapsing object

Eternally collapsing object
Magnetospheric eternally collapsing object
Magnetospheric eternally collapsing objectMagnetospheric eternally collapsing objectFuzzballFuzzballWhite holeWhite holeNaked singularityNaked singularityRing singularityRing singularityImmirzi parameterImmirzi parameterMembrane paradigmMembrane paradigmKugelblitzKugelblitzWormholeWormholeQuasi-starQuasi-star


Issues



No-hair theorem
Information paradox
Cosmic censorship
Alternative models
Holographic principle
Black hole complementarity
firewall (physics)
ER=EPR



Issues


No-hair theorem
Information paradox
Cosmic censorship
Alternative models
Holographic principle
Black hole complementarity
firewall (physics)
ER=EPR




No-hair theorem
Information paradox
Cosmic censorship
Alternative models
Holographic principle
Black hole complementarity
firewall (physics)
ER=EPR


No-hair theorem
Information paradox
Cosmic censorship
Alternative models
Holographic principle
Black hole complementarity
firewall (physics)
ER=EPR
No-hair theoremNo-hair theoremInformation paradoxInformation paradoxCosmic censorshipCosmic censorshipAlternative modelsAlternative modelsHolographic principleHolographic principleBlack hole complementarityBlack hole complementarityfirewall (physics)firewall (physics)ER=EPRER=EPR


Metrics



Schwarzschild
Kerr
Reissner–Nordström
Kerr–Newman



Metrics


Schwarzschild
Kerr
Reissner–Nordström
Kerr–Newman




Schwarzschild
Kerr
Reissner–Nordström
Kerr–Newman


Schwarzschild
Kerr
Reissner–Nordström
Kerr–Newman
SchwarzschildSchwarzschildKerrKerrReissner–NordströmReissner–NordströmKerr–NewmanKerr–Newman


Lists



Black holes
Most massive
Quasars



Lists


Black holes
Most massive
Quasars




Black holes
Most massive
Quasars


Black holes
Most massive
Quasars
Black holesBlack holesMost massiveMost massiveQuasarsQuasars


Related



Timeline of black hole physics
Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer
Hypercompact stellar system
Black hole starship



Related


Timeline of black hole physics
Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer
Hypercompact stellar system
Black hole starship




Timeline of black hole physics
Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer
Hypercompact stellar system
Black hole starship


Timeline of black hole physics
Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer
Hypercompact stellar system
Black hole starship
Timeline of black hole physicsTimeline of black hole physicsRossi X-ray Timing ExplorerRossi X-ray Timing ExplorerHypercompact stellar systemHypercompact stellar systemBlack hole starshipBlack hole starship







v
t
e


Relativity






Special
relativity





Background




Principle of relativity
Introduction to special relativity
Special relativity









Foundations




Frame of reference
Speed of light
Rapidity
Maxwell's equations









Formulation




Galilean relativity
Galilean transformation
Lorentz transformation









Consequences




Time dilation
Relativistic mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Length contraction
Relativity of simultaneity
Relativistic Doppler effect
Thomas precession
Relativistic disks









Spacetime




Light cone
World line
Spacetime diagram
Biquaternions
Minkowski space














General
relativity





Background




Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Resources









Fundamental
concepts




Special relativity
Equivalence principle
World line
Riemannian geometry
Minkowski diagram









Phenomena




Black hole
Event horizon
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Lenses
Singularity
Waves
Ladder paradox
Twin paradox
Two-body problem









Equations




ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
Einstein field equations
Geodesic equation
Friedmann equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation









Advanced
theories




Brans–Dicke theory
Kaluza–Klein
Mach's principle
Quantum gravity









Solutions




Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Taub–NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust











Scientists



Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedmann
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Taylor
Hulse
Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
Weiss
Bondi
Misner
others














v
t
e


Relativity






Special
relativity





Background




Principle of relativity
Introduction to special relativity
Special relativity









Foundations




Frame of reference
Speed of light
Rapidity
Maxwell's equations









Formulation




Galilean relativity
Galilean transformation
Lorentz transformation









Consequences




Time dilation
Relativistic mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Length contraction
Relativity of simultaneity
Relativistic Doppler effect
Thomas precession
Relativistic disks









Spacetime




Light cone
World line
Spacetime diagram
Biquaternions
Minkowski space














General
relativity





Background




Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Resources









Fundamental
concepts




Special relativity
Equivalence principle
World line
Riemannian geometry
Minkowski diagram









Phenomena




Black hole
Event horizon
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Lenses
Singularity
Waves
Ladder paradox
Twin paradox
Two-body problem









Equations




ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
Einstein field equations
Geodesic equation
Friedmann equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation









Advanced
theories




Brans–Dicke theory
Kaluza–Klein
Mach's principle
Quantum gravity









Solutions




Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Taub–NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust











Scientists



Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedmann
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Taylor
Hulse
Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
Weiss
Bondi
Misner
others












v
t
e


Relativity






Special
relativity





Background




Principle of relativity
Introduction to special relativity
Special relativity









Foundations




Frame of reference
Speed of light
Rapidity
Maxwell's equations









Formulation




Galilean relativity
Galilean transformation
Lorentz transformation









Consequences




Time dilation
Relativistic mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Length contraction
Relativity of simultaneity
Relativistic Doppler effect
Thomas precession
Relativistic disks









Spacetime




Light cone
World line
Spacetime diagram
Biquaternions
Minkowski space














General
relativity





Background




Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Resources









Fundamental
concepts




Special relativity
Equivalence principle
World line
Riemannian geometry
Minkowski diagram









Phenomena




Black hole
Event horizon
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Lenses
Singularity
Waves
Ladder paradox
Twin paradox
Two-body problem









Equations




ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
Einstein field equations
Geodesic equation
Friedmann equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation









Advanced
theories




Brans–Dicke theory
Kaluza–Klein
Mach's principle
Quantum gravity









Solutions




Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Taub–NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust











Scientists



Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedmann
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Taylor
Hulse
Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
Weiss
Bondi
Misner
others










v
t
e


Relativity






Special
relativity





Background




Principle of relativity
Introduction to special relativity
Special relativity









Foundations




Frame of reference
Speed of light
Rapidity
Maxwell's equations









Formulation




Galilean relativity
Galilean transformation
Lorentz transformation









Consequences




Time dilation
Relativistic mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Length contraction
Relativity of simultaneity
Relativistic Doppler effect
Thomas precession
Relativistic disks









Spacetime




Light cone
World line
Spacetime diagram
Biquaternions
Minkowski space














General
relativity





Background




Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Resources









Fundamental
concepts




Special relativity
Equivalence principle
World line
Riemannian geometry
Minkowski diagram









Phenomena




Black hole
Event horizon
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Lenses
Singularity
Waves
Ladder paradox
Twin paradox
Two-body problem









Equations




ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
Einstein field equations
Geodesic equation
Friedmann equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation









Advanced
theories




Brans–Dicke theory
Kaluza–Klein
Mach's principle
Quantum gravity









Solutions




Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Taub–NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust











Scientists



Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedmann
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Taylor
Hulse
Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
Weiss
Bondi
Misner
others








v
t
e


Relativity




v
t
e


Relativity


v
t
e


v
t
e
vvvttteeeRelativityRelativity


Special
relativity





Background




Principle of relativity
Introduction to special relativity
Special relativity









Foundations




Frame of reference
Speed of light
Rapidity
Maxwell's equations









Formulation




Galilean relativity
Galilean transformation
Lorentz transformation









Consequences




Time dilation
Relativistic mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Length contraction
Relativity of simultaneity
Relativistic Doppler effect
Thomas precession
Relativistic disks









Spacetime




Light cone
World line
Spacetime diagram
Biquaternions
Minkowski space









Special
relativitySpecial
relativity




Background




Principle of relativity
Introduction to special relativity
Special relativity









Foundations




Frame of reference
Speed of light
Rapidity
Maxwell's equations









Formulation




Galilean relativity
Galilean transformation
Lorentz transformation









Consequences




Time dilation
Relativistic mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Length contraction
Relativity of simultaneity
Relativistic Doppler effect
Thomas precession
Relativistic disks









Spacetime




Light cone
World line
Spacetime diagram
Biquaternions
Minkowski space








Background




Principle of relativity
Introduction to special relativity
Special relativity









Foundations




Frame of reference
Speed of light
Rapidity
Maxwell's equations









Formulation




Galilean relativity
Galilean transformation
Lorentz transformation









Consequences




Time dilation
Relativistic mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Length contraction
Relativity of simultaneity
Relativistic Doppler effect
Thomas precession
Relativistic disks









Spacetime




Light cone
World line
Spacetime diagram
Biquaternions
Minkowski space






Background




Principle of relativity
Introduction to special relativity
Special relativity




Background
Background


Principle of relativity
Introduction to special relativity
Special relativity




Principle of relativity
Introduction to special relativity
Special relativity


Principle of relativity
Introduction to special relativity
Special relativity
Principle of relativityPrinciple of relativityIntroduction to special relativityIntroduction to special relativitySpecial relativitySpecial relativity



Foundations




Frame of reference
Speed of light
Rapidity
Maxwell's equations




Foundations
Foundations


Frame of reference
Speed of light
Rapidity
Maxwell's equations




Frame of reference
Speed of light
Rapidity
Maxwell's equations


Frame of reference
Speed of light
Rapidity
Maxwell's equations
Frame of referenceFrame of referenceSpeed of lightSpeed of lightRapidityRapidityMaxwell's equationsMaxwell's equations



Formulation




Galilean relativity
Galilean transformation
Lorentz transformation




Formulation
Formulation


Galilean relativity
Galilean transformation
Lorentz transformation




Galilean relativity
Galilean transformation
Lorentz transformation


Galilean relativity
Galilean transformation
Lorentz transformation
Galilean relativityGalilean relativityGalilean transformationGalilean transformationLorentz transformationLorentz transformation



Consequences




Time dilation
Relativistic mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Length contraction
Relativity of simultaneity
Relativistic Doppler effect
Thomas precession
Relativistic disks




Consequences
Consequences


Time dilation
Relativistic mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Length contraction
Relativity of simultaneity
Relativistic Doppler effect
Thomas precession
Relativistic disks




Time dilation
Relativistic mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Length contraction
Relativity of simultaneity
Relativistic Doppler effect
Thomas precession
Relativistic disks


Time dilation
Relativistic mass
Mass–energy equivalence
Length contraction
Relativity of simultaneity
Relativistic Doppler effect
Thomas precession
Relativistic disks
Time dilationTime dilationRelativistic massRelativistic massMass–energy equivalenceMass–energy equivalenceLength contractionLength contractionRelativity of simultaneityRelativity of simultaneityRelativistic Doppler effectRelativistic Doppler effectThomas precessionThomas precessionRelativistic disksRelativistic disks



Spacetime




Light cone
World line
Spacetime diagram
Biquaternions
Minkowski space




Spacetime
SpacetimeSpacetime


Light cone
World line
Spacetime diagram
Biquaternions
Minkowski space




Light cone
World line
Spacetime diagram
Biquaternions
Minkowski space


Light cone
World line
Spacetime diagram
Biquaternions
Minkowski space
Light coneLight coneWorld lineWorld lineSpacetime diagramSpacetime diagramBiquaternionsBiquaternionsMinkowski spaceMinkowski space




General
relativity





Background




Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Resources









Fundamental
concepts




Special relativity
Equivalence principle
World line
Riemannian geometry
Minkowski diagram









Phenomena




Black hole
Event horizon
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Lenses
Singularity
Waves
Ladder paradox
Twin paradox
Two-body problem









Equations




ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
Einstein field equations
Geodesic equation
Friedmann equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation









Advanced
theories




Brans–Dicke theory
Kaluza–Klein
Mach's principle
Quantum gravity









Solutions




Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Taub–NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust






General
relativityGeneral
relativity




Background




Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Resources









Fundamental
concepts




Special relativity
Equivalence principle
World line
Riemannian geometry
Minkowski diagram









Phenomena




Black hole
Event horizon
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Lenses
Singularity
Waves
Ladder paradox
Twin paradox
Two-body problem









Equations




ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
Einstein field equations
Geodesic equation
Friedmann equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation









Advanced
theories




Brans–Dicke theory
Kaluza–Klein
Mach's principle
Quantum gravity









Solutions




Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Taub–NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust








Background




Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Resources









Fundamental
concepts




Special relativity
Equivalence principle
World line
Riemannian geometry
Minkowski diagram









Phenomena




Black hole
Event horizon
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Lenses
Singularity
Waves
Ladder paradox
Twin paradox
Two-body problem









Equations




ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
Einstein field equations
Geodesic equation
Friedmann equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation









Advanced
theories




Brans–Dicke theory
Kaluza–Klein
Mach's principle
Quantum gravity









Solutions




Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Taub–NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust






Background




Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Resources




Background
Background


Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Resources




Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Resources


Introduction
Mathematical formulation
Resources
IntroductionIntroductionMathematical formulationMathematical formulationResourcesResources



Fundamental
concepts




Special relativity
Equivalence principle
World line
Riemannian geometry
Minkowski diagram




Fundamental
concepts
Fundamental
concepts


Special relativity
Equivalence principle
World line
Riemannian geometry
Minkowski diagram




Special relativity
Equivalence principle
World line
Riemannian geometry
Minkowski diagram


Special relativity
Equivalence principle
World line
Riemannian geometry
Minkowski diagram
Special relativitySpecial relativityEquivalence principleEquivalence principleWorld lineWorld lineRiemannian geometryRiemannian geometryMinkowski diagramMinkowski diagram



Phenomena




Black hole
Event horizon
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Lenses
Singularity
Waves
Ladder paradox
Twin paradox
Two-body problem




Phenomena
Phenomena


Black hole
Event horizon
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Lenses
Singularity
Waves
Ladder paradox
Twin paradox
Two-body problem




Black hole
Event horizon
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Lenses
Singularity
Waves
Ladder paradox
Twin paradox
Two-body problem


Black hole
Event horizon
Frame-dragging
Geodetic effect
Lenses
Singularity
Waves
Ladder paradox
Twin paradox
Two-body problem
Black holeBlack holeEvent horizonEvent horizonFrame-draggingFrame-draggingGeodetic effectGeodetic effectLensesLensesSingularitySingularityWavesWavesLadder paradoxLadder paradoxTwin paradoxTwin paradoxTwo-body problemTwo-body problem



Equations




ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
Einstein field equations
Geodesic equation
Friedmann equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation




Equations
Equations


ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
Einstein field equations
Geodesic equation
Friedmann equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation




ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
Einstein field equations
Geodesic equation
Friedmann equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation


ADM formalism
BSSN formalism
Einstein field equations
Geodesic equation
Friedmann equations
Linearized gravity
Post-Newtonian formalism
Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation
ADM formalismADM formalismBSSN formalismBSSN formalismEinstein field equationsEinstein field equationsGeodesic equationGeodesic equationFriedmann equationsFriedmann equationsLinearized gravityLinearized gravityPost-Newtonian formalismPost-Newtonian formalismHamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equationHamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation



Advanced
theories




Brans–Dicke theory
Kaluza–Klein
Mach's principle
Quantum gravity




Advanced
theories
Advanced
theories


Brans–Dicke theory
Kaluza–Klein
Mach's principle
Quantum gravity




Brans–Dicke theory
Kaluza–Klein
Mach's principle
Quantum gravity


Brans–Dicke theory
Kaluza–Klein
Mach's principle
Quantum gravity
Brans–Dicke theoryBrans–Dicke theoryKaluza–KleinKaluza–KleinMach's principleMach's principleQuantum gravityQuantum gravity



Solutions




Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Taub–NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust




Solutions
SolutionsSolutions


Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Taub–NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust




Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Taub–NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust


Schwarzschild
Reissner–Nordström
Gödel
Kerr
Kerr–Newman
Kasner
Taub–NUT
Milne
Robertson–Walker
pp-wave
van Stockum dust
SchwarzschildSchwarzschildReissner–NordströmReissner–NordströmGödel
KerrGödelKerrKerr–NewmanKerr–NewmanKasnerKasnerTaub–NUTTaub–NUTMilneMilneRobertson–WalkerRobertson–Walkerpp-wavepp-wavevan Stockum dustvan Stockum dust


Scientists



Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedmann
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Taylor
Hulse
Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
Weiss
Bondi
Misner
others



Scientists


Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedmann
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Taylor
Hulse
Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
Weiss
Bondi
Misner
others




Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedmann
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Taylor
Hulse
Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
Weiss
Bondi
Misner
others


Einstein
Lorentz
Hilbert
Poincaré
Schwarzschild
de Sitter
Reissner
Nordström
Weyl
Eddington
Friedmann
Milne
Zwicky
Lemaître
Gödel
Wheeler
Robertson
Bardeen
Walker
Kerr
Chandrasekhar
Ehlers
Penrose
Hawking
Taylor
Hulse
Stockum
Taub
Newman
Yau
Thorne
Weiss
Bondi
Misner
others
EinsteinEinsteinLorentzLorentzHilbertHilbertPoincaréPoincaréSchwarzschildSchwarzschildde Sitterde SitterReissnerReissnerNordströmNordströmWeylWeylEddingtonEddingtonFriedmannFriedmannMilneMilneZwickyZwickyLemaîtreLemaîtreGödelGödelWheelerWheelerRobertsonRobertsonBardeenBardeenWalkerWalkerKerrKerrChandrasekharChandrasekharEhlersEhlersPenrosePenroseHawkingHawkingTaylorTaylorHulseHulseStockumStockumTaubTaubNewmanNewmanYauYauThorneThorneWeissWeissBondiBondiMisnerMisnerothersothersothers







v
t
e


String theory






Background



Strings
History of string theory

First superstring revolution
Second superstring revolution


String theory landscape











Theory



Nambu–Goto action
Polyakov action
Bosonic string theory
Superstring theory

Type I string
Type II string

Type IIA string theory
Type IIB string theory


Heterotic string


N=2 superstring
F-theory
String field theory
Matrix string theory
Nonlinear sigma model
Tachyon condensation
RNS formalism








Concepts





String duality




T-duality
S-duality
U-duality
Montonen–Olive duality
Mysterious duality









Particles and fields




Graviton
Dilaton
Tachyon
Ramond–Ramond field
Kalb–Ramond field
Magnetic monopole









Branes




D-brane
S-brane
Black brane
Black holes
Black string
Brane cosmology
Quiver diagram
Hanany–Witten transition











Conformal
field theory



Virasoro algebra
Mirror symmetry
Conformal anomaly
Conformal algebra
Superconformal algebra
Vertex operator algebra
Loop algebra
Kac–Moody algebra
Wess–Zumino–Witten model








Gauge theory



Anomalies
Instantons
Chern–Simons form
Bogomol'nyi–Prasad–Sommerfield bound
Exceptional Lie groups (G2, F4, E6, E7, E8)
ADE classification
Dirac string
P-form electrodynamics








Geometry



Kaluza–Klein theory
Compactification
Why 10 dimensions?
Kähler manifold
Ricci-flat manifold

Calabi–Yau manifold
Hyperkähler manifold

K3 surface


G2 manifold
Spin(7) manifold


Generalized complex manifold
Orbifold
Conifold
Orientifold
Moduli space
Hořava–Witten domain wall
K-theory (physics)
Twisted K-theory








Supersymmetry



Supergravity
Superspace
Lie superalgebra
Lie supergroup








Holography



Holographic principle
AdS/CFT correspondence








M-theory



Matrix theory
Introduction to M-theory








String theorists



Nima Arkani-Hamed
Michael Francis Atiyah
Tom Banks
David Berenstein
Gerald Cleaver
Robbert Dijkgraaf
Jacques Distler
Michael Douglas
Michael Duff
Sergio Ferrara
Willy Fischler
Daniel Friedan
Rajesh Gopakumar
Michael Green
Brian Greene
David Gross
Steven Gubser
Sergei Gukov
Jeffrey Harvey
Petr Hořava
Gary Gibbons
Michio Kaku
Renata Kallosh
Theodor Kaluza
Anton Kapustin
Igor Klebanov
Oskar Klein
Hong Liu
Juan Maldacena
Donald Marolf
Emil Martinecm
Shiraz Minwalla
Gregory Moore
Lubos Motl
Sunil Mukhi
Robert Myers
Asad Naqvi
K. S. Narain
Horatiu Nastase
Nikita Nekrasov
André Neveu
Dimitri Nanopoulos
Holger Bech Nielsen
Peter van Nieuwenhuizen
Hirosi Ooguri
Joseph Polchinski
Alexander Polyakov
Arvind Rajaraman
Lisa Randall
Seifallah Randjbar-Daemi
Martin Rocek
John H. Schwarz
Nathan Seiberg
Ashoke Sen
Steve Shenker
Warren Siegel
Eva Silverstein
Matthias Staudacher
Andrew Strominger
Leonard Susskind
Paul Townsend
Sandip Trivedi
Cumrun Vafa
Gabriele Veneziano
Erik Verlinde
Herman Verlinde
Edward Witten
Tamiaki Yoneya
Alexander Zamolodchikov
Alexei Zamolodchikov
Barton Zwiebach














v
t
e


String theory






Background



Strings
History of string theory

First superstring revolution
Second superstring revolution


String theory landscape











Theory



Nambu–Goto action
Polyakov action
Bosonic string theory
Superstring theory

Type I string
Type II string

Type IIA string theory
Type IIB string theory


Heterotic string


N=2 superstring
F-theory
String field theory
Matrix string theory
Nonlinear sigma model
Tachyon condensation
RNS formalism








Concepts





String duality




T-duality
S-duality
U-duality
Montonen–Olive duality
Mysterious duality









Particles and fields




Graviton
Dilaton
Tachyon
Ramond–Ramond field
Kalb–Ramond field
Magnetic monopole









Branes




D-brane
S-brane
Black brane
Black holes
Black string
Brane cosmology
Quiver diagram
Hanany–Witten transition











Conformal
field theory



Virasoro algebra
Mirror symmetry
Conformal anomaly
Conformal algebra
Superconformal algebra
Vertex operator algebra
Loop algebra
Kac–Moody algebra
Wess–Zumino–Witten model








Gauge theory



Anomalies
Instantons
Chern–Simons form
Bogomol'nyi–Prasad–Sommerfield bound
Exceptional Lie groups (G2, F4, E6, E7, E8)
ADE classification
Dirac string
P-form electrodynamics








Geometry



Kaluza–Klein theory
Compactification
Why 10 dimensions?
Kähler manifold
Ricci-flat manifold

Calabi–Yau manifold
Hyperkähler manifold

K3 surface


G2 manifold
Spin(7) manifold


Generalized complex manifold
Orbifold
Conifold
Orientifold
Moduli space
Hořava–Witten domain wall
K-theory (physics)
Twisted K-theory








Supersymmetry



Supergravity
Superspace
Lie superalgebra
Lie supergroup








Holography



Holographic principle
AdS/CFT correspondence








M-theory



Matrix theory
Introduction to M-theory








String theorists



Nima Arkani-Hamed
Michael Francis Atiyah
Tom Banks
David Berenstein
Gerald Cleaver
Robbert Dijkgraaf
Jacques Distler
Michael Douglas
Michael Duff
Sergio Ferrara
Willy Fischler
Daniel Friedan
Rajesh Gopakumar
Michael Green
Brian Greene
David Gross
Steven Gubser
Sergei Gukov
Jeffrey Harvey
Petr Hořava
Gary Gibbons
Michio Kaku
Renata Kallosh
Theodor Kaluza
Anton Kapustin
Igor Klebanov
Oskar Klein
Hong Liu
Juan Maldacena
Donald Marolf
Emil Martinecm
Shiraz Minwalla
Gregory Moore
Lubos Motl
Sunil Mukhi
Robert Myers
Asad Naqvi
K. S. Narain
Horatiu Nastase
Nikita Nekrasov
André Neveu
Dimitri Nanopoulos
Holger Bech Nielsen
Peter van Nieuwenhuizen
Hirosi Ooguri
Joseph Polchinski
Alexander Polyakov
Arvind Rajaraman
Lisa Randall
Seifallah Randjbar-Daemi
Martin Rocek
John H. Schwarz
Nathan Seiberg
Ashoke Sen
Steve Shenker
Warren Siegel
Eva Silverstein
Matthias Staudacher
Andrew Strominger
Leonard Susskind
Paul Townsend
Sandip Trivedi
Cumrun Vafa
Gabriele Veneziano
Erik Verlinde
Herman Verlinde
Edward Witten
Tamiaki Yoneya
Alexander Zamolodchikov
Alexei Zamolodchikov
Barton Zwiebach












v
t
e


String theory






Background



Strings
History of string theory

First superstring revolution
Second superstring revolution


String theory landscape











Theory



Nambu–Goto action
Polyakov action
Bosonic string theory
Superstring theory

Type I string
Type II string

Type IIA string theory
Type IIB string theory


Heterotic string


N=2 superstring
F-theory
String field theory
Matrix string theory
Nonlinear sigma model
Tachyon condensation
RNS formalism








Concepts





String duality




T-duality
S-duality
U-duality
Montonen–Olive duality
Mysterious duality









Particles and fields




Graviton
Dilaton
Tachyon
Ramond–Ramond field
Kalb–Ramond field
Magnetic monopole









Branes




D-brane
S-brane
Black brane
Black holes
Black string
Brane cosmology
Quiver diagram
Hanany–Witten transition











Conformal
field theory



Virasoro algebra
Mirror symmetry
Conformal anomaly
Conformal algebra
Superconformal algebra
Vertex operator algebra
Loop algebra
Kac–Moody algebra
Wess–Zumino–Witten model








Gauge theory



Anomalies
Instantons
Chern–Simons form
Bogomol'nyi–Prasad–Sommerfield bound
Exceptional Lie groups (G2, F4, E6, E7, E8)
ADE classification
Dirac string
P-form electrodynamics








Geometry



Kaluza–Klein theory
Compactification
Why 10 dimensions?
Kähler manifold
Ricci-flat manifold

Calabi–Yau manifold
Hyperkähler manifold

K3 surface


G2 manifold
Spin(7) manifold


Generalized complex manifold
Orbifold
Conifold
Orientifold
Moduli space
Hořava–Witten domain wall
K-theory (physics)
Twisted K-theory








Supersymmetry



Supergravity
Superspace
Lie superalgebra
Lie supergroup








Holography



Holographic principle
AdS/CFT correspondence








M-theory



Matrix theory
Introduction to M-theory








String theorists



Nima Arkani-Hamed
Michael Francis Atiyah
Tom Banks
David Berenstein
Gerald Cleaver
Robbert Dijkgraaf
Jacques Distler
Michael Douglas
Michael Duff
Sergio Ferrara
Willy Fischler
Daniel Friedan
Rajesh Gopakumar
Michael Green
Brian Greene
David Gross
Steven Gubser
Sergei Gukov
Jeffrey Harvey
Petr Hořava
Gary Gibbons
Michio Kaku
Renata Kallosh
Theodor Kaluza
Anton Kapustin
Igor Klebanov
Oskar Klein
Hong Liu
Juan Maldacena
Donald Marolf
Emil Martinecm
Shiraz Minwalla
Gregory Moore
Lubos Motl
Sunil Mukhi
Robert Myers
Asad Naqvi
K. S. Narain
Horatiu Nastase
Nikita Nekrasov
André Neveu
Dimitri Nanopoulos
Holger Bech Nielsen
Peter van Nieuwenhuizen
Hirosi Ooguri
Joseph Polchinski
Alexander Polyakov
Arvind Rajaraman
Lisa Randall
Seifallah Randjbar-Daemi
Martin Rocek
John H. Schwarz
Nathan Seiberg
Ashoke Sen
Steve Shenker
Warren Siegel
Eva Silverstein
Matthias Staudacher
Andrew Strominger
Leonard Susskind
Paul Townsend
Sandip Trivedi
Cumrun Vafa
Gabriele Veneziano
Erik Verlinde
Herman Verlinde
Edward Witten
Tamiaki Yoneya
Alexander Zamolodchikov
Alexei Zamolodchikov
Barton Zwiebach










v
t
e


String theory






Background



Strings
History of string theory

First superstring revolution
Second superstring revolution


String theory landscape











Theory



Nambu–Goto action
Polyakov action
Bosonic string theory
Superstring theory

Type I string
Type II string

Type IIA string theory
Type IIB string theory


Heterotic string


N=2 superstring
F-theory
String field theory
Matrix string theory
Nonlinear sigma model
Tachyon condensation
RNS formalism








Concepts





String duality




T-duality
S-duality
U-duality
Montonen–Olive duality
Mysterious duality









Particles and fields




Graviton
Dilaton
Tachyon
Ramond–Ramond field
Kalb–Ramond field
Magnetic monopole









Branes




D-brane
S-brane
Black brane
Black holes
Black string
Brane cosmology
Quiver diagram
Hanany–Witten transition











Conformal
field theory



Virasoro algebra
Mirror symmetry
Conformal anomaly
Conformal algebra
Superconformal algebra
Vertex operator algebra
Loop algebra
Kac–Moody algebra
Wess–Zumino–Witten model








Gauge theory



Anomalies
Instantons
Chern–Simons form
Bogomol'nyi–Prasad–Sommerfield bound
Exceptional Lie groups (G2, F4, E6, E7, E8)
ADE classification
Dirac string
P-form electrodynamics








Geometry



Kaluza–Klein theory
Compactification
Why 10 dimensions?
Kähler manifold
Ricci-flat manifold

Calabi–Yau manifold
Hyperkähler manifold

K3 surface


G2 manifold
Spin(7) manifold


Generalized complex manifold
Orbifold
Conifold
Orientifold
Moduli space
Hořava–Witten domain wall
K-theory (physics)
Twisted K-theory








Supersymmetry



Supergravity
Superspace
Lie superalgebra
Lie supergroup








Holography



Holographic principle
AdS/CFT correspondence








M-theory



Matrix theory
Introduction to M-theory








String theorists



Nima Arkani-Hamed
Michael Francis Atiyah
Tom Banks
David Berenstein
Gerald Cleaver
Robbert Dijkgraaf
Jacques Distler
Michael Douglas
Michael Duff
Sergio Ferrara
Willy Fischler
Daniel Friedan
Rajesh Gopakumar
Michael Green
Brian Greene
David Gross
Steven Gubser
Sergei Gukov
Jeffrey Harvey
Petr Hořava
Gary Gibbons
Michio Kaku
Renata Kallosh
Theodor Kaluza
Anton Kapustin
Igor Klebanov
Oskar Klein
Hong Liu
Juan Maldacena
Donald Marolf
Emil Martinecm
Shiraz Minwalla
Gregory Moore
Lubos Motl
Sunil Mukhi
Robert Myers
Asad Naqvi
K. S. Narain
Horatiu Nastase
Nikita Nekrasov
André Neveu
Dimitri Nanopoulos
Holger Bech Nielsen
Peter van Nieuwenhuizen
Hirosi Ooguri
Joseph Polchinski
Alexander Polyakov
Arvind Rajaraman
Lisa Randall
Seifallah Randjbar-Daemi
Martin Rocek
John H. Schwarz
Nathan Seiberg
Ashoke Sen
Steve Shenker
Warren Siegel
Eva Silverstein
Matthias Staudacher
Andrew Strominger
Leonard Susskind
Paul Townsend
Sandip Trivedi
Cumrun Vafa
Gabriele Veneziano
Erik Verlinde
Herman Verlinde
Edward Witten
Tamiaki Yoneya
Alexander Zamolodchikov
Alexei Zamolodchikov
Barton Zwiebach








v
t
e


String theory




v
t
e


String theory


v
t
e


v
t
e
vvvttteeeString theoryString theory


Background



Strings
History of string theory

First superstring revolution
Second superstring revolution


String theory landscape






Background


Strings
History of string theory

First superstring revolution
Second superstring revolution


String theory landscape




Strings
History of string theory

First superstring revolution
Second superstring revolution


String theory landscape


Strings
History of string theory

First superstring revolution
Second superstring revolution


String theory landscape
StringsStringsHistory of string theory

First superstring revolution
Second superstring revolution

History of string theory
First superstring revolution
Second superstring revolution
First superstring revolutionFirst superstring revolutionSecond superstring revolutionSecond superstring revolutionString theory landscapeString theory landscape




Theory



Nambu–Goto action
Polyakov action
Bosonic string theory
Superstring theory

Type I string
Type II string

Type IIA string theory
Type IIB string theory


Heterotic string


N=2 superstring
F-theory
String field theory
Matrix string theory
Nonlinear sigma model
Tachyon condensation
RNS formalism



Theory


Nambu–Goto action
Polyakov action
Bosonic string theory
Superstring theory

Type I string
Type II string

Type IIA string theory
Type IIB string theory


Heterotic string


N=2 superstring
F-theory
String field theory
Matrix string theory
Nonlinear sigma model
Tachyon condensation
RNS formalism




Nambu–Goto action
Polyakov action
Bosonic string theory
Superstring theory

Type I string
Type II string

Type IIA string theory
Type IIB string theory


Heterotic string


N=2 superstring
F-theory
String field theory
Matrix string theory
Nonlinear sigma model
Tachyon condensation
RNS formalism


Nambu–Goto action
Polyakov action
Bosonic string theory
Superstring theory

Type I string
Type II string

Type IIA string theory
Type IIB string theory


Heterotic string


N=2 superstring
F-theory
String field theory
Matrix string theory
Nonlinear sigma model
Tachyon condensation
RNS formalism
Nambu–Goto actionNambu–Goto actionPolyakov actionPolyakov actionBosonic string theoryBosonic string theorySuperstring theory

Type I string
Type II string

Type IIA string theory
Type IIB string theory


Heterotic string

Superstring theory
Type I string
Type II string

Type IIA string theory
Type IIB string theory


Heterotic string
Type I stringType I stringType II string

Type IIA string theory
Type IIB string theory

Type II string
Type IIA string theory
Type IIB string theory
Type IIA string theoryType IIA string theoryType IIB string theoryType IIB string theoryHeterotic stringHeterotic stringN=2 superstringN=2 superstringF-theoryF-theoryString field theoryString field theoryMatrix string theoryMatrix string theoryNonlinear sigma modelNonlinear sigma modelTachyon condensationTachyon condensationRNS formalismRNS formalism


Concepts





String duality




T-duality
S-duality
U-duality
Montonen–Olive duality
Mysterious duality









Particles and fields




Graviton
Dilaton
Tachyon
Ramond–Ramond field
Kalb–Ramond field
Magnetic monopole









Branes




D-brane
S-brane
Black brane
Black holes
Black string
Brane cosmology
Quiver diagram
Hanany–Witten transition






Concepts




String duality




T-duality
S-duality
U-duality
Montonen–Olive duality
Mysterious duality









Particles and fields




Graviton
Dilaton
Tachyon
Ramond–Ramond field
Kalb–Ramond field
Magnetic monopole









Branes




D-brane
S-brane
Black brane
Black holes
Black string
Brane cosmology
Quiver diagram
Hanany–Witten transition








String duality




T-duality
S-duality
U-duality
Montonen–Olive duality
Mysterious duality









Particles and fields




Graviton
Dilaton
Tachyon
Ramond–Ramond field
Kalb–Ramond field
Magnetic monopole









Branes




D-brane
S-brane
Black brane
Black holes
Black string
Brane cosmology
Quiver diagram
Hanany–Witten transition






String duality




T-duality
S-duality
U-duality
Montonen–Olive duality
Mysterious duality




String duality
String dualityString duality


T-duality
S-duality
U-duality
Montonen–Olive duality
Mysterious duality




T-duality
S-duality
U-duality
Montonen–Olive duality
Mysterious duality


T-duality
S-duality
U-duality
Montonen–Olive duality
Mysterious duality
T-dualityT-dualityS-dualityS-dualityU-dualityU-dualityMontonen–Olive dualityMontonen–Olive dualityMysterious dualityMysterious duality



Particles and fields




Graviton
Dilaton
Tachyon
Ramond–Ramond field
Kalb–Ramond field
Magnetic monopole




Particles and fields
Particles and fields


Graviton
Dilaton
Tachyon
Ramond–Ramond field
Kalb–Ramond field
Magnetic monopole




Graviton
Dilaton
Tachyon
Ramond–Ramond field
Kalb–Ramond field
Magnetic monopole


Graviton
Dilaton
Tachyon
Ramond–Ramond field
Kalb–Ramond field
Magnetic monopole
GravitonGravitonDilatonDilatonTachyonTachyonRamond–Ramond fieldRamond–Ramond fieldKalb–Ramond fieldKalb–Ramond fieldMagnetic monopoleMagnetic monopole



Branes




D-brane
S-brane
Black brane
Black holes
Black string
Brane cosmology
Quiver diagram
Hanany–Witten transition




Branes
BranesBranes


D-brane
S-brane
Black brane
Black holes
Black string
Brane cosmology
Quiver diagram
Hanany–Witten transition




D-brane
S-brane
Black brane
Black holes
Black string
Brane cosmology
Quiver diagram
Hanany–Witten transition


D-brane
S-brane
Black brane
Black holes
Black string
Brane cosmology
Quiver diagram
Hanany–Witten transition
D-braneD-braneS-braneS-braneBlack braneBlack braneBlack holesBlack holesBlack stringBlack stringBrane cosmologyBrane cosmologyQuiver diagramQuiver diagramHanany–Witten transitionHanany–Witten transition


Conformal
field theory



Virasoro algebra
Mirror symmetry
Conformal anomaly
Conformal algebra
Superconformal algebra
Vertex operator algebra
Loop algebra
Kac–Moody algebra
Wess–Zumino–Witten model



Conformal
field theoryConformal
field theory


Virasoro algebra
Mirror symmetry
Conformal anomaly
Conformal algebra
Superconformal algebra
Vertex operator algebra
Loop algebra
Kac–Moody algebra
Wess–Zumino–Witten model




Virasoro algebra
Mirror symmetry
Conformal anomaly
Conformal algebra
Superconformal algebra
Vertex operator algebra
Loop algebra
Kac–Moody algebra
Wess–Zumino–Witten model


Virasoro algebra
Mirror symmetry
Conformal anomaly
Conformal algebra
Superconformal algebra
Vertex operator algebra
Loop algebra
Kac–Moody algebra
Wess–Zumino–Witten model
Virasoro algebraVirasoro algebraMirror symmetryMirror symmetryConformal anomalyConformal anomalyConformal algebraConformal algebraSuperconformal algebraSuperconformal algebraVertex operator algebraVertex operator algebraLoop algebraLoop algebraKac–Moody algebraKac–Moody algebraWess–Zumino–Witten modelWess–Zumino–Witten model


Gauge theory



Anomalies
Instantons
Chern–Simons form
Bogomol'nyi–Prasad–Sommerfield bound
Exceptional Lie groups (G2, F4, E6, E7, E8)
ADE classification
Dirac string
P-form electrodynamics



Gauge theoryGauge theory


Anomalies
Instantons
Chern–Simons form
Bogomol'nyi–Prasad–Sommerfield bound
Exceptional Lie groups (G2, F4, E6, E7, E8)
ADE classification
Dirac string
P-form electrodynamics




Anomalies
Instantons
Chern–Simons form
Bogomol'nyi–Prasad–Sommerfield bound
Exceptional Lie groups (G2, F4, E6, E7, E8)
ADE classification
Dirac string
P-form electrodynamics


Anomalies
Instantons
Chern–Simons form
Bogomol'nyi–Prasad–Sommerfield bound
Exceptional Lie groups (G2, F4, E6, E7, E8)
ADE classification
Dirac string
P-form electrodynamics
AnomaliesAnomaliesInstantonsInstantonsChern–Simons formChern–Simons formBogomol'nyi–Prasad–Sommerfield boundBogomol'nyi–Prasad–Sommerfield boundExceptional Lie groups (G2, F4, E6, E7, E8)Exceptional Lie groupsG22F44E66E77E88ADE classificationADE classificationDirac stringDirac stringP-form electrodynamicsP-form electrodynamics


Geometry



Kaluza–Klein theory
Compactification
Why 10 dimensions?
Kähler manifold
Ricci-flat manifold

Calabi–Yau manifold
Hyperkähler manifold

K3 surface


G2 manifold
Spin(7) manifold


Generalized complex manifold
Orbifold
Conifold
Orientifold
Moduli space
Hořava–Witten domain wall
K-theory (physics)
Twisted K-theory



Geometry


Kaluza–Klein theory
Compactification
Why 10 dimensions?
Kähler manifold
Ricci-flat manifold

Calabi–Yau manifold
Hyperkähler manifold

K3 surface


G2 manifold
Spin(7) manifold


Generalized complex manifold
Orbifold
Conifold
Orientifold
Moduli space
Hořava–Witten domain wall
K-theory (physics)
Twisted K-theory




Kaluza–Klein theory
Compactification
Why 10 dimensions?
Kähler manifold
Ricci-flat manifold

Calabi–Yau manifold
Hyperkähler manifold

K3 surface


G2 manifold
Spin(7) manifold


Generalized complex manifold
Orbifold
Conifold
Orientifold
Moduli space
Hořava–Witten domain wall
K-theory (physics)
Twisted K-theory


Kaluza–Klein theory
Compactification
Why 10 dimensions?
Kähler manifold
Ricci-flat manifold

Calabi–Yau manifold
Hyperkähler manifold

K3 surface


G2 manifold
Spin(7) manifold


Generalized complex manifold
Orbifold
Conifold
Orientifold
Moduli space
Hořava–Witten domain wall
K-theory (physics)
Twisted K-theory
Kaluza–Klein theoryKaluza–Klein theoryCompactificationCompactificationWhy 10 dimensions?Why 10 dimensionsKähler manifoldKähler manifoldRicci-flat manifold

Calabi–Yau manifold
Hyperkähler manifold

K3 surface


G2 manifold
Spin(7) manifold

Ricci-flat manifold
Calabi–Yau manifold
Hyperkähler manifold

K3 surface


G2 manifold
Spin(7) manifold
Calabi–Yau manifoldCalabi–Yau manifoldHyperkähler manifold

K3 surface

Hyperkähler manifold
K3 surface
K3 surfaceK3 surfaceG2 manifoldG2 manifold2Spin(7) manifoldSpin(7) manifoldGeneralized complex manifoldGeneralized complex manifoldOrbifoldOrbifoldConifoldConifoldOrientifoldOrientifoldModuli spaceModuli spaceHořava–Witten domain wallHořava–Witten domain wallK-theory (physics)K-theory (physics)Twisted K-theoryTwisted K-theory


Supersymmetry



Supergravity
Superspace
Lie superalgebra
Lie supergroup



SupersymmetrySupersymmetry


Supergravity
Superspace
Lie superalgebra
Lie supergroup




Supergravity
Superspace
Lie superalgebra
Lie supergroup


Supergravity
Superspace
Lie superalgebra
Lie supergroup
SupergravitySupergravitySuperspaceSuperspaceLie superalgebraLie superalgebraLie supergroupLie supergroup


Holography



Holographic principle
AdS/CFT correspondence



HolographyHolography


Holographic principle
AdS/CFT correspondence




Holographic principle
AdS/CFT correspondence


Holographic principle
AdS/CFT correspondence
Holographic principleHolographic principleAdS/CFT correspondenceAdS/CFT correspondence


M-theory



Matrix theory
Introduction to M-theory



M-theoryM-theory


Matrix theory
Introduction to M-theory




Matrix theory
Introduction to M-theory


Matrix theory
Introduction to M-theory
Matrix theoryMatrix theoryIntroduction to M-theoryIntroduction to M-theory


String theorists



Nima Arkani-Hamed
Michael Francis Atiyah
Tom Banks
David Berenstein
Gerald Cleaver
Robbert Dijkgraaf
Jacques Distler
Michael Douglas
Michael Duff
Sergio Ferrara
Willy Fischler
Daniel Friedan
Rajesh Gopakumar
Michael Green
Brian Greene
David Gross
Steven Gubser
Sergei Gukov
Jeffrey Harvey
Petr Hořava
Gary Gibbons
Michio Kaku
Renata Kallosh
Theodor Kaluza
Anton Kapustin
Igor Klebanov
Oskar Klein
Hong Liu
Juan Maldacena
Donald Marolf
Emil Martinecm
Shiraz Minwalla
Gregory Moore
Lubos Motl
Sunil Mukhi
Robert Myers
Asad Naqvi
K. S. Narain
Horatiu Nastase
Nikita Nekrasov
André Neveu
Dimitri Nanopoulos
Holger Bech Nielsen
Peter van Nieuwenhuizen
Hirosi Ooguri
Joseph Polchinski
Alexander Polyakov
Arvind Rajaraman
Lisa Randall
Seifallah Randjbar-Daemi
Martin Rocek
John H. Schwarz
Nathan Seiberg
Ashoke Sen
Steve Shenker
Warren Siegel
Eva Silverstein
Matthias Staudacher
Andrew Strominger
Leonard Susskind
Paul Townsend
Sandip Trivedi
Cumrun Vafa
Gabriele Veneziano
Erik Verlinde
Herman Verlinde
Edward Witten
Tamiaki Yoneya
Alexander Zamolodchikov
Alexei Zamolodchikov
Barton Zwiebach



String theorists


Nima Arkani-Hamed
Michael Francis Atiyah
Tom Banks
David Berenstein
Gerald Cleaver
Robbert Dijkgraaf
Jacques Distler
Michael Douglas
Michael Duff
Sergio Ferrara
Willy Fischler
Daniel Friedan
Rajesh Gopakumar
Michael Green
Brian Greene
David Gross
Steven Gubser
Sergei Gukov
Jeffrey Harvey
Petr Hořava
Gary Gibbons
Michio Kaku
Renata Kallosh
Theodor Kaluza
Anton Kapustin
Igor Klebanov
Oskar Klein
Hong Liu
Juan Maldacena
Donald Marolf
Emil Martinecm
Shiraz Minwalla
Gregory Moore
Lubos Motl
Sunil Mukhi
Robert Myers
Asad Naqvi
K. S. Narain
Horatiu Nastase
Nikita Nekrasov
André Neveu
Dimitri Nanopoulos
Holger Bech Nielsen
Peter van Nieuwenhuizen
Hirosi Ooguri
Joseph Polchinski
Alexander Polyakov
Arvind Rajaraman
Lisa Randall
Seifallah Randjbar-Daemi
Martin Rocek
John H. Schwarz
Nathan Seiberg
Ashoke Sen
Steve Shenker
Warren Siegel
Eva Silverstein
Matthias Staudacher
Andrew Strominger
Leonard Susskind
Paul Townsend
Sandip Trivedi
Cumrun Vafa
Gabriele Veneziano
Erik Verlinde
Herman Verlinde
Edward Witten
Tamiaki Yoneya
Alexander Zamolodchikov
Alexei Zamolodchikov
Barton Zwiebach




Nima Arkani-Hamed
Michael Francis Atiyah
Tom Banks
David Berenstein
Gerald Cleaver
Robbert Dijkgraaf
Jacques Distler
Michael Douglas
Michael Duff
Sergio Ferrara
Willy Fischler
Daniel Friedan
Rajesh Gopakumar
Michael Green
Brian Greene
David Gross
Steven Gubser
Sergei Gukov
Jeffrey Harvey
Petr Hořava
Gary Gibbons
Michio Kaku
Renata Kallosh
Theodor Kaluza
Anton Kapustin
Igor Klebanov
Oskar Klein
Hong Liu
Juan Maldacena
Donald Marolf
Emil Martinecm
Shiraz Minwalla
Gregory Moore
Lubos Motl
Sunil Mukhi
Robert Myers
Asad Naqvi
K. S. Narain
Horatiu Nastase
Nikita Nekrasov
André Neveu
Dimitri Nanopoulos
Holger Bech Nielsen
Peter van Nieuwenhuizen
Hirosi Ooguri
Joseph Polchinski
Alexander Polyakov
Arvind Rajaraman
Lisa Randall
Seifallah Randjbar-Daemi
Martin Rocek
John H. Schwarz
Nathan Seiberg
Ashoke Sen
Steve Shenker
Warren Siegel
Eva Silverstein
Matthias Staudacher
Andrew Strominger
Leonard Susskind
Paul Townsend
Sandip Trivedi
Cumrun Vafa
Gabriele Veneziano
Erik Verlinde
Herman Verlinde
Edward Witten
Tamiaki Yoneya
Alexander Zamolodchikov
Alexei Zamolodchikov
Barton Zwiebach


Nima Arkani-Hamed
Michael Francis Atiyah
Tom Banks
David Berenstein
Gerald Cleaver
Robbert Dijkgraaf
Jacques Distler
Michael Douglas
Michael Duff
Sergio Ferrara
Willy Fischler
Daniel Friedan
Rajesh Gopakumar
Michael Green
Brian Greene
David Gross
Steven Gubser
Sergei Gukov
Jeffrey Harvey
Petr Hořava
Gary Gibbons
Michio Kaku
Renata Kallosh
Theodor Kaluza
Anton Kapustin
Igor Klebanov
Oskar Klein
Hong Liu
Juan Maldacena
Donald Marolf
Emil Martinecm
Shiraz Minwalla
Gregory Moore
Lubos Motl
Sunil Mukhi
Robert Myers
Asad Naqvi
K. S. Narain
Horatiu Nastase
Nikita Nekrasov
André Neveu
Dimitri Nanopoulos
Holger Bech Nielsen
Peter van Nieuwenhuizen
Hirosi Ooguri
Joseph Polchinski
Alexander Polyakov
Arvind Rajaraman
Lisa Randall
Seifallah Randjbar-Daemi
Martin Rocek
John H. Schwarz
Nathan Seiberg
Ashoke Sen
Steve Shenker
Warren Siegel
Eva Silverstein
Matthias Staudacher
Andrew Strominger
Leonard Susskind
Paul Townsend
Sandip Trivedi
Cumrun Vafa
Gabriele Veneziano
Erik Verlinde
Herman Verlinde
Edward Witten
Tamiaki Yoneya
Alexander Zamolodchikov
Alexei Zamolodchikov
Barton Zwiebach
Nima Arkani-HamedNima Arkani-HamedMichael Francis AtiyahMichael Francis AtiyahTom BanksTom BanksDavid BerensteinDavid BerensteinGerald CleaverGerald CleaverRobbert DijkgraafRobbert DijkgraafJacques DistlerJacques DistlerMichael DouglasMichael DouglasMichael DuffMichael DuffSergio FerraraSergio FerraraWilly FischlerWilly FischlerDaniel FriedanDaniel FriedanRajesh GopakumarRajesh GopakumarMichael GreenMichael GreenBrian GreeneBrian GreeneDavid GrossDavid GrossSteven GubserSteven GubserSergei GukovSergei GukovJeffrey HarveyJeffrey HarveyPetr HořavaPetr HořavaGary GibbonsGary GibbonsMichio KakuMichio KakuRenata KalloshRenata KalloshTheodor KaluzaTheodor KaluzaAnton KapustinAnton KapustinIgor KlebanovIgor KlebanovOskar KleinOskar KleinHong LiuJuan MaldacenaJuan MaldacenaDonald MarolfDonald MarolfEmil MartinecmEmil MartinecmShiraz MinwallaShiraz MinwallaGregory MooreGregory MooreLubos MotlLubos MotlSunil MukhiSunil MukhiRobert MyersRobert MyersAsad NaqviAsad NaqviK. S. NarainK. S. NarainHoratiu NastaseHoratiu NastaseNikita NekrasovNikita NekrasovAndré NeveuAndré NeveuDimitri NanopoulosDimitri NanopoulosHolger Bech NielsenHolger Bech NielsenPeter van NieuwenhuizenPeter van NieuwenhuizenHirosi OoguriHirosi OoguriJoseph PolchinskiJoseph PolchinskiAlexander PolyakovAlexander PolyakovArvind RajaramanArvind RajaramanLisa RandallLisa RandallSeifallah Randjbar-DaemiSeifallah Randjbar-DaemiMartin RocekMartin RocekJohn H. SchwarzJohn H. SchwarzNathan SeibergNathan SeibergAshoke SenAshoke SenSteve ShenkerSteve ShenkerWarren SiegelWarren SiegelEva SilversteinEva SilversteinMatthias StaudacherMatthias StaudacherAndrew StromingerAndrew StromingerLeonard SusskindLeonard SusskindPaul TownsendPaul TownsendSandip TrivediSandip TrivediCumrun VafaCumrun VafaGabriele VenezianoGabriele VenezianoErik VerlindeErik VerlindeHerman VerlindeHerman VerlindeEdward WittenEdward WittenTamiaki YoneyaTamiaki YoneyaAlexander ZamolodchikovAlexander ZamolodchikovAlexei ZamolodchikovAlexei ZamolodchikovBarton ZwiebachBarton Zwiebach




Authority control



GND: 4053793-6
BNF: cb11933630s (data)
NDL: 00561056











Authority control



GND: 4053793-6
BNF: cb11933630s (data)
NDL: 00561056









Authority control



GND: 4053793-6
BNF: cb11933630s (data)
NDL: 00561056







Authority control



GND: 4053793-6
BNF: cb11933630s (data)
NDL: 00561056





Authority control



GND: 4053793-6
BNF: cb11933630s (data)
NDL: 00561056



Authority controlAuthority control


GND: 4053793-6
BNF: cb11933630s (data)
NDL: 00561056




GND: 4053793-6
BNF: cb11933630s (data)
NDL: 00561056


GND: 4053793-6
BNF: cb11933630s (data)
NDL: 00561056
GND: 4053793-6GND4053793-64053793-6BNF: cb11933630s (data)BNFcb11933630s (data)cb11933630s(data)NDL: 00561056NDL0056105600561056
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Black_hole&oldid=716792743"					https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Black_hole&oldid=716792743Categories: Unsolved problems in physicsBlack holesGalaxiesTheory of relativityHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from February 2013Articles with inconsistent citation formatsCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2016Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2015Good articlesUse dmy dates from March 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersArticles containing video clipsCategories: Unsolved problems in physicsBlack holesGalaxiesTheory of relativityCategoriesUnsolved problems in physicsBlack holesGalaxiesTheory of relativityUnsolved problems in physicsUnsolved problems in physicsBlack holesBlack holesGalaxiesGalaxiesTheory of relativityTheory of relativityHidden categories: All articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from February 2013Articles with inconsistent citation formatsCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2016Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2015Good articlesUse dmy dates from March 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersArticles containing video clipsAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from February 2013Articles with inconsistent citation formatsCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2016Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2015Good articlesUse dmy dates from March 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersArticles containing video clipsAll articles with dead external linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from February 2013Articles with dead external links from February 2013Articles with inconsistent citation formatsArticles with inconsistent citation formatsCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pagesWikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2016Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2016Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2015Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2015All articles with unsourced statementsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2015Articles with unsourced statements from April 2015Good articlesGood articlesUse dmy dates from March 2011Use dmy dates from March 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersArticles containing video clipsArticles containing video clips
Navigation menu


Personal tools

Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in 



Namespaces

Article
Talk




Variants









Views

Read
View source
View history



More







Search



 







Navigation


Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store 



Interaction


HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page 



Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page 



Print/export


Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version 



In other projects


Wikimedia Commons 



Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischالعربيةAragonésঅসমীয়াAsturianuAzərbaycancaবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎भोजपुरीБългарскиBoarischབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGaelgGàidhligGalegoગુજરાતી𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHornjoserbsceHrvatskiIdoIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתBasa Jawaಕನ್ನಡКъарачай-малкъарქართულიKaszëbscziҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKurdîКыргызчаЛезгиLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLimburgsLumbaartMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMaltiमराठीმარგალურიBahasa MelayuМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNederlandsनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語НохчийнNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNovialOccitanଓଡ଼ିଆOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیPiemontèisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаScotsShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیی ناوەندیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиBasa SundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்Татарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยTürkçeTürkmençeУкраїнськаاردوVahcuenghVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng Việt文言Winarayייִדיש粵語Žemaitėška中文 
Edit links 


Navigation menu

Personal tools

Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in 



Namespaces

Article
Talk




Variants









Views

Read
View source
View history



More







Search



 




Personal tools

Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in 
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Not logged inTalkTalkContributionsContributionsCreate accountCreate accountLog inLog in

Namespaces

Article
Talk




Variants







Namespaces

Article
Talk

Namespaces
Article
Talk
ArticleArticleArticleTalkTalkTalk

Variants






Variants
Variants





Views

Read
View source
View history



More







Search



 



Views

Read
View source
View history

Views
Read
View source
View history
ReadReadReadView sourceView sourceView sourceView historyView historyView history
More




MoreMore





Search



 


Search
Search

 

 


Navigation


Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store 



Interaction


HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page 



Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page 



Print/export


Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version 



In other projects


Wikimedia Commons 



Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischالعربيةAragonésঅসমীয়াAsturianuAzərbaycancaবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎भोजपुरीБългарскиBoarischབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGaelgGàidhligGalegoગુજરાતી𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHornjoserbsceHrvatskiIdoIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתBasa Jawaಕನ್ನಡКъарачай-малкъарქართულიKaszëbscziҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKurdîКыргызчаЛезгиLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLimburgsLumbaartMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMaltiमराठीმარგალურიBahasa MelayuМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNederlandsनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語НохчийнNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNovialOccitanଓଡ଼ିଆOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیPiemontèisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаScotsShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیی ناوەندیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиBasa SundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்Татарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยTürkçeTürkmençeУкраїнськаاردوVahcuenghVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng Việt文言Winarayייִדיש粵語Žemaitėška中文 
Edit links 


Navigation


Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store 

Navigation

Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store 

Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Main pageMain pageContentsContentsFeatured contentFeatured contentCurrent eventsCurrent eventsRandom articleRandom articleDonate to WikipediaDonate to WikipediaWikipedia storeWikipedia store
Interaction


HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page 

Interaction

HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page 

HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page HelpHelpAbout WikipediaAbout WikipediaCommunity portalCommunity portalRecent changesRecent changesContact pageContact page
Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page 

Tools

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page 

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page What links hereWhat links hereRelated changesRelated changesUpload fileUpload fileSpecial pagesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPermanent linkPage informationPage informationWikidata itemWikidata itemCite this pageCite this page
Print/export


Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version 

Print/export

Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version 

Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Create a bookCreate a bookDownload as PDFDownload as PDFPrintable versionPrintable version
In other projects


Wikimedia Commons 

In other projects

Wikimedia Commons 

Wikimedia Commons Wikimedia CommonsWikimedia Commons
Languages


AfrikaansAlemannischالعربيةAragonésঅসমীয়াAsturianuAzərbaycancaবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎भोजपुरीБългарскиBoarischབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGaelgGàidhligGalegoગુજરાતી𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHornjoserbsceHrvatskiIdoIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתBasa Jawaಕನ್ನಡКъарачай-малкъарქართულიKaszëbscziҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKurdîКыргызчаЛезгиLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLimburgsLumbaartMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMaltiमराठीმარგალურიBahasa MelayuМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNederlandsनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語НохчийнNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNovialOccitanଓଡ଼ିଆOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیPiemontèisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаScotsShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیی ناوەندیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиBasa SundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்Татарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยTürkçeTürkmençeУкраїнськаاردوVahcuenghVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng Việt文言Winarayייִדיש粵語Žemaitėška中文 
Edit links 
Languages

AfrikaansAlemannischالعربيةAragonésঅসমীয়াAsturianuAzərbaycancaবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎भोजपुरीБългарскиBoarischབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGaelgGàidhligGalegoગુજરાતી𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHornjoserbsceHrvatskiIdoIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתBasa Jawaಕನ್ನಡКъарачай-малкъарქართულიKaszëbscziҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKurdîКыргызчаЛезгиLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLimburgsLumbaartMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMaltiमराठीმარგალურიBahasa MelayuМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNederlandsनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語НохчийнNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNovialOccitanଓଡ଼ିଆOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیPiemontèisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаScotsShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیی ناوەندیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиBasa SundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்Татарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยTürkçeTürkmençeУкраїнськаاردوVahcuenghVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng Việt文言Winarayייִדיש粵語Žemaitėška中文 
Edit links 
AfrikaansAlemannischالعربيةAragonésঅসমীয়াAsturianuAzərbaycancaবাংলাBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎भोजपुरीБългарскиBoarischབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBrezhonegБуряадCatalàЧӑвашлаČeštinaCymraegDanskDeutschEestiΕλληνικάEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFiji HindiFøroysktFrançaisFryskGaeilgeGaelgGàidhligGalegoગુજરાતી𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺한국어Հայերենहिन्दीHornjoserbsceHrvatskiIdoIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתBasa Jawaಕನ್ನಡКъарачай-малкъарქართულიKaszëbscziҚазақшаKernowekKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKurdîКыргызчаЛезгиLatinaLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLimburgsLumbaartMagyarМакедонскиMalagasyമലയാളംMaltiमराठीმარგალურიBahasa MelayuМонголမြန်မာဘာသာNederlandsनेपालीनेपाल भाषा日本語НохчийнNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNovialOccitanଓଡ଼ିଆOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیPiemontèisPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусиньскыйРусскийСаха тылаScotsShqipSicilianuසිංහලSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaکوردیی ناوەندیСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиBasa SundaSuomiSvenskaTagalogதமிழ்Татарча/tatarçaతెలుగుไทยTürkçeTürkmençeУкраїнськаاردوVahcuenghVènetoVepsän kel’Tiếng Việt文言Winarayייִדיש粵語Žemaitėška中文 AfrikaansAfrikaansAlemannischAlemannischالعربيةالعربيةAragonésAragonésঅসমীয়াঅসমীয়াAsturianuAsturianuAzərbaycancaAzərbaycancaবাংলাবাংলাBân-lâm-gúBân-lâm-gúБашҡортсаБашҡортсаБеларускаяБеларускаяБеларуская (тарашкевіца)‎Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎भोजपुरीभोजपुरीБългарскиБългарскиBoarischBoarischབོད་ཡིགབོད་ཡིགBosanskiBosanskiBrezhonegBrezhonegБуряадБуряадCatalàCatalàЧӑвашлаЧӑвашлаČeštinaČeštinaCymraegCymraegDanskDanskDeutschDeutschEestiEestiΕλληνικάΕλληνικάEspañolEspañolEsperantoEsperantoEuskaraEuskaraفارسیفارسیFiji HindiFiji HindiFøroysktFøroysktFrançaisFrançaisFryskFryskGaeilgeGaeilgeGaelgGaelgGàidhligGàidhligGalegoGalegoગુજરાતીગુજરાતી𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺한국어한국어ՀայերենՀայերենहिन्दीहिन्दीHornjoserbsceHornjoserbsceHrvatskiHrvatskiIdoIdoIlokanoIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaBahasa IndonesiaInterlinguaInterlinguaÍslenskaÍslenskaItalianoItalianoעבריתעבריתBasa JawaBasa Jawaಕನ್ನಡಕನ್ನಡКъарачай-малкъарКъарачай-малкъарქართულიქართულიKaszëbscziKaszëbscziҚазақшаҚазақшаKernowekKernowekKiswahiliKiswahiliKreyòl ayisyenKreyòl ayisyenKurdîKurdîКыргызчаКыргызчаЛезгиЛезгиLatinaLatinaLatviešuLatviešuLëtzebuergeschLëtzebuergeschLietuviųLietuviųLimburgsLimburgsLumbaartLumbaartMagyarMagyarМакедонскиМакедонскиMalagasyMalagasyമലയാളംമലയാളംMaltiMaltiमराठीमराठीმარგალურიმარგალურიBahasa MelayuBahasa MelayuМонголМонголမြန်မာဘာသာမြန်မာဘာသာNederlandsNederlandsनेपालीनेपालीनेपाल भाषानेपाल भाषा日本語日本語НохчийнНохчийнNorsk bokmålNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNorsk nynorskNovialNovialOccitanOccitanଓଡ଼ିଆଓଡ଼ିଆOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаOʻzbekcha/ўзбекчаਪੰਜਾਬੀਪੰਜਾਬੀپنجابیپنجابیPiemontèisPiemontèisPolskiPolskiPortuguêsPortuguêsRomânăRomânăРусиньскыйРусиньскыйРусскийРусскийСаха тылаСаха тылаScotsScotsShqipShqipSicilianuSicilianuසිංහලසිංහලSimple EnglishSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSlovenščinaکوردیی ناوەندیکوردیی ناوەندیСрпски / srpskiСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиBasa SundaBasa SundaSuomiSuomiSvenskaSvenskaTagalogTagalogதமிழ்தமிழ்Татарча/tatarçaТатарча/tatarçaతెలుగుతెలుగుไทยไทยTürkçeTürkçeTürkmençeTürkmençeУкраїнськаУкраїнськаاردواردوVahcuenghVahcuenghVènetoVènetoVepsän kel’Vepsän kel’Tiếng ViệtTiếng Việt文言文言WinarayWinarayייִדישייִדיש粵語粵語ŽemaitėškaŽemaitėška中文中文Edit linksEdit linksEdit links

 This page was last modified on 23 April 2016, at 22:22.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Developers
Cookie statement
Mobile view



 

 



 This page was last modified on 23 April 2016, at 22:22.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
 This page was last modified on 23 April 2016, at 22:22.Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike LicenseTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyWikimedia Foundation, Inc.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Developers
Cookie statement
Mobile view
Privacy policyPrivacy policyAbout WikipediaAbout WikipediaDisclaimersDisclaimersContact WikipediaContact WikipediaDevelopersDevelopersCookie statementCookie statementMobile viewMobile view

 

 

 
 