Theory of everything - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia




Theory of everything

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

This article is about the physical concept.  For other uses, see Theory of everything (disambiguation).


Beyond the Standard Model



Simulated Large Hadron Collider CMS particle detector data depicting a Higgs boson produced by colliding protons decaying into hadron jets and electrons



Standard Model




Evidence


Hierarchy problem
Dark matter
Cosmological constant problem
Strong CP problem
Neutrino oscillation








Theories


Technicolor
Kaluza–Klein theory
Grand Unified Theory
Theory of everything
String theory
Causal fermion systems
Superfluid vacuum theory








Supersymmetry


MSSM
Superstring theory
Supergravity








Quantum gravity


String theory
Loop quantum gravity
Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal fermion systems
Causal sets
Canonical quantum gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory








Experiments


ANNIE
Gran Sasso
INO
LHC
SNO
Super-K
Tevatron
NOνA









v
t
e





A theory of everything (ToE) or final theory, ultimate theory, or master theory is a hypothetical single, all-encompassing, coherent theoretical framework of physics that fully explains and links together all physical aspects of the universe.[1]:6 Finding a ToE is one of the major unsolved problems in physics. Over the past few centuries, two theoretical frameworks have been developed that, as a whole, most closely resemble a ToE. These two theories upon which all modern physics rests are general relativity (GR) and quantum field theory (QFT). GR is a theoretical framework that only focuses on gravity for understanding the universe in regions of both large-scale and high-mass: stars, galaxies, clusters of galaxies, etc. On the other hand, QFT is a theoretical framework that only focuses on three non-gravitational forces for understanding the universe in regions of both small scale and low mass: sub-atomic particles, atoms, molecules, etc. QFT successfully implemented the Standard Model and unified the interactions (so-called Grand Unified Theory) between the three non-gravitational forces: weak, strong, and electromagnetic force.[2]:122
Through years of research, physicists have experimentally confirmed with tremendous accuracy virtually every prediction made by these two theories when in their appropriate domains of applicability. In accordance with their findings, scientists also learned that GR and QFT, as they are currently formulated, are mutually incompatible – they cannot both be right. Since the usual domains of applicability of GR and QFT are so different, most situations require that only one of the two theories be used.[3][4]:842–844 As it turns out, this incompatibility between GR and QFT is only an apparent issue in regions of extremely small-scale and high-mass, such as those that exist within a black hole or during the beginning stages of the universe (i.e., the moment immediately following the Big Bang). To resolve this conflict, a theoretical framework revealing a deeper underlying reality, unifying gravity with the other three interactions, must be discovered to harmoniously integrate the realms of GR and QFT into a seamless whole: a single theory that, in principle, is capable of describing all phenomena. In pursuit of this goal, quantum gravity has recently become an area of active research.
Over the past few decades, a single explanatory framework, called "string theory", has emerged that intends to be the ultimate theory of the universe. Some physicists[who?] believe that, at the beginning of the universe (up to 10−43 seconds after the Big Bang), the four fundamental forces were once a single fundamental force. According to string theory, every particle in the universe, at its most microscopic level (Planck length), consists of varying combinations of vibrating strings (or strands) with preferred patterns of vibration. String theory claims that it is through these specific oscillatory patterns of strings that a particle of unique mass and force charge is created (that is to say, the electron is a type of string that vibrates one way, while the up-quark is a type of string vibrating another way, and so forth).
Initially, the term theory of everything was used with an ironic connotation to refer to various overgeneralized theories. For example, a grandfather of Ijon Tichy — a character from a cycle of Stanisław Lem's science fiction stories of the 1960s — was known to work on the "General Theory of Everything". Physicist John Ellis[5] claims to have introduced the term into the technical literature in an article in Nature in 1986.[6] Over time, the term stuck in popularizations of theoretical physics research.



Contents


1 Historical antecedents

1.1 From ancient Greece to Einstein
1.2 Twentieth century and the nuclear interactions


2 Modern physics

2.1 Conventional sequence of theories
2.2 String theory and M-theory
2.3 Loop quantum gravity
2.4 Other attempts
2.5 Present status


3 Theory of everything and philosophy
4 Arguments against a theory of everything

4.1 Gödel's incompleteness theorem
4.2 Fundamental limits in accuracy
4.3 Lack of fundamental laws
4.4 Impossibility of being "of everything"
4.5 Infinite number of onion layers
4.6 Impossibility of calculation


5 See also
6 References

6.1 Footnotes
6.2 Bibliography


7 External links



Historical antecedents[edit]
From ancient Greece to Einstein[edit]
Archimedes was possibly the first scientist known to have described nature with axioms (or principles) and then deduce new results from them.[7] He thus tried to describe "everything" starting from a few axioms. Any "theory of everything" is similarly expected to be based on axioms and to deduce all observable phenomena from them.[8]:340
The concept of 'atom', introduced by Democritus, unified all phenomena observed in nature as the motion of atoms. In ancient Greek times philosophers speculated that the apparent diversity of observed phenomena was due to a single type of interaction, namely the collisions of atoms. Following atomism, the mechanical philosophy of the 17th century posited that all forces could be ultimately reduced to contact forces between the atoms, then imagined as tiny solid particles.[9]:184[10]
In the late 17th century, Isaac Newton's description of the long-distance force of gravity implied that not all forces in nature result from things coming into contact. Newton's work in his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy dealt with this in a further example of unification, in this case unifying Galileo's work on terrestrial gravity, Kepler's laws of planetary motion and the phenomenon of tides by explaining these apparent actions at a distance under one single law: the law of universal gravitation.[11]
In 1814, building on these results, Laplace famously suggested that a sufficiently powerful intellect could, if it knew the position and velocity of every particle at a given time, along with the laws of nature, calculate the position of any particle at any other time:[12]:ch 7

An intellect which at a certain moment would know all forces that set nature in motion, and all positions of all items of which nature is composed, if this intellect were also vast enough to submit these data to analysis, it would embrace in a single formula the movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those of the tiniest atom; for such an intellect nothing would be uncertain and the future just like the past would be present before its eyes.
— Essai philosophique sur les probabilités, Introduction. 1814

Laplace thus envisaged a combination of gravitation and mechanics as a theory of everything. Modern quantum mechanics implies that uncertainty is inescapable, and thus that Laplace's vision has to be amended: a theory of everything must include gravitation and quantum mechanics.
In 1820, Hans Christian Ørsted discovered a connection between electricity and magnetism, triggering decades of work that culminated in 1865, in James Clerk Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism. During the 19th and early 20th centuries, it gradually became apparent that many common examples of forces – contact forces, elasticity, viscosity, friction, and pressure – result from electrical interactions between the smallest particles of matter.
In his experiments of 1849–50, Michael Faraday was the first to search for a unification of gravity with electricity and magnetism.[13] However, he found no connection.
In 1900, David Hilbert published a famous list of mathematical problems. In Hilbert's sixth problem, he challenged researchers to find an axiomatic basis to all of physics. In this problem he thus asked for what today would be called a theory of everything.[14]
In the late 1920s, the new quantum mechanics showed that the chemical bonds between atoms were examples of (quantum) electrical forces, justifying Dirac's boast that "the underlying physical laws necessary for the mathematical theory of a large part of physics and the whole of chemistry are thus completely known".[15]
After 1915, when Albert Einstein published the theory of gravity (general relativity), the search for a unified field theory combining gravity with electromagnetism began with a renewed interest. In Einstein's day, the strong and the weak forces had not yet been discovered, yet, he found the potential existence of two other distinct forces -gravity and electromagnetism- far more alluring. This launched his thirty-year voyage in search of the so-called "unified field theory" that he hoped would show that these two forces are really manifestations of one grand underlying principle. During these last few decades of his life, this quixotic quest isolated Einstein from the mainstream of physics. Understandably, the mainstream was instead far more excited about the newly emerging framework of quantum mechanics. Einstein wrote to a friend in the early 1940s, "I have become a lonely old chap who is mainly known because he doesn't wear socks and who is exhibited as a curiosity on special occasions." Prominent contributors were Gunnar Nordström, Hermann Weyl, Arthur Eddington, Theodor Kaluza, Oskar Klein, and most notably, Albert Einstein and his collaborators. Einstein intensely searched for, but ultimately failed to find, a unifying theory.[16]:ch 17 (But see:Einstein–Maxwell–Dirac equations.) More than a half a century later, Einstein's dream of discovering a unified theory has become the Holy Grail of modern physics.
Twentieth century and the nuclear interactions[edit]
In the twentieth century, the search for a unifying theory was interrupted by the discovery of the strong and weak nuclear forces (or interactions), which differ both from gravity and from electromagnetism. A further hurdle was the acceptance that in a ToE, quantum mechanics had to be incorporated from the start, rather than emerging as a consequence of a deterministic unified theory, as Einstein had hoped.
Gravity and electromagnetism could always peacefully coexist as entries in a list of classical forces, but for many years it seemed that gravity could not even be incorporated into the quantum framework, let alone unified with the other fundamental forces. For this reason, work on unification, for much of the twentieth century, focused on understanding the three "quantum" forces: electromagnetism and the weak and strong forces. The first two were combined in 1967–68 by Sheldon Glashow, Steven Weinberg, and Abdus Salam into the "electroweak" force.[17] Electroweak unification is a broken symmetry: the electromagnetic and weak forces appear distinct at low energies because the particles carrying the weak force, the W and Z bosons, have non-zero masses of 7001804000000000000♠80.4 GeV/c2 and 7001912000000000000♠91.2 GeV/c2, whereas the photon, which carries the electromagnetic force, is massless. At higher energies Ws and Zs can be created easily and the unified nature of the force becomes apparent.
While the strong and electroweak forces peacefully coexist in the Standard Model of particle physics, they remain distinct. So far, the quest for a theory of everything is thus unsuccessful on two points: neither a unification of the strong and electroweak forces – which Laplace would have called 'contact forces' – has been achieved, nor has a unification of these forces with gravitation been achieved.
Modern physics[edit]
Conventional sequence of theories[edit]
A Theory of Everything would unify all the fundamental interactions of nature: gravitation, strong interaction, weak interaction, and electromagnetism. Because the weak interaction can transform elementary particles from one kind into another, the ToE should also yield a deep understanding of the various different kinds of possible particles. The usual assumed path of theories is given in the following graph, where each unification step leads one level up:




 


 


 


 

Theory of everything

 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 

Quantum gravity

 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

Space Curvature

 


 


 


 

Electronuclear force (GUT)

 




 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

Standard model of cosmology

 


 


 

Standard model of particle physics






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 

Strong interaction
SU(3)

 


 


 


 


 

Electroweak interaction
SU(2) x U(1)Y

 




 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Weak interaction

 


 


 


 

Electromagnetism
U(1)EM




 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Electricity

 


 


 


 

Magnetism

 




 


 


 



In this graph, electroweak unification occurs at around 100 GeV, grand unification is predicted to occur at 1016 GeV, and unification of the GUT force with gravity is expected at the Planck energy, roughly 1019 GeV.
Several Grand Unified Theories (GUTs) have been proposed to unify electromagnetism and the weak and strong forces. Grand unification would imply the existence of an electronuclear force; it is expected to set in at energies of the order of 1016 GeV, far greater than could be reached by any possible Earth-based particle accelerator. Although the simplest GUTs have been experimentally ruled out, the general idea, especially when linked with supersymmetry, remains a favorite candidate in the theoretical physics community. Supersymmetric GUTs seem plausible not only for their theoretical "beauty", but because they naturally produce large quantities of dark matter, and because the inflationary force may be related to GUT physics (although it does not seem to form an inevitable part of the theory). Yet GUTs are clearly not the final answer; both the current standard model and all proposed GUTs are quantum field theories which require the problematic technique of renormalization to yield sensible answers. This is usually regarded as a sign that these are only effective field theories, omitting crucial phenomena relevant only at very high energies.[3]
The final step in the graph requires resolving the separation between quantum mechanics and gravitation, often equated with general relativity. Numerous researchers concentrate their efforts on this specific step; nevertheless, no accepted theory of quantum gravity – and thus no accepted theory of everything – has emerged yet. It is usually assumed that the ToE will also solve the remaining problems of GUTs.
In addition to explaining the forces listed in the graph, a ToE may also explain the status of at least two candidate forces suggested by modern cosmology: an inflationary force and dark energy. Furthermore, cosmological experiments also suggest the existence of dark matter, supposedly composed of fundamental particles outside the scheme of the standard model. However, the existence of these forces and particles has not been proven yet.
String theory and M-theory[edit]



Unsolved problem in physics:
Is string theory, superstring theory, or M-theory, or some other variant on this theme, a step on the road to a "theory of everything", or just a blind alley?
(more unsolved problems in physics)



Since the 1990s, some physicists[who?] believe that 11-dimensional M-theory, which is described in some limits by one of the five perturbative superstring theories, and in another by the maximally-supersymmetric 11-dimensional supergravity, is the theory of everything. However, there is no widespread consensus on this issue.
A surprising property of string/M-theory is that extra dimensions are required for the theory's consistency. In this regard, string theory can be seen as building on the insights of the Kaluza–Klein theory, in which it was realized that applying general relativity to a five-dimensional universe (with one of them small and curled up) looks from the four-dimensional perspective like the usual general relativity together with Maxwell's electrodynamics. This lent credence to the idea of unifying gauge and gravity interactions, and to extra dimensions, but did not address the detailed experimental requirements. Another important property of string theory is its supersymmetry, which together with extra dimensions are the two main proposals for resolving the hierarchy problem of the standard model, which is (roughly) the question of why gravity is so much weaker than any other force. The extra-dimensional solution involves allowing gravity to propagate into the other dimensions while keeping other forces confined to a four-dimensional spacetime, an idea that has been realized with explicit stringy mechanisms.[18]
Research into string theory has been encouraged by a variety of theoretical and experimental factors. On the experimental side, the particle content of the standard model supplemented with neutrino masses fits into a spinor representation of SO(10), a subgroup of E8 that routinely emerges in string theory, such as in heterotic string theory[19] or (sometimes equivalently) in F-theory.[20][21] String theory has mechanisms that may explain why fermions come in three hierarchical generations, and explain the mixing rates between quark generations.[22] On the theoretical side, it has begun to address some of the key questions in quantum gravity, such as resolving the black hole information paradox, counting the correct entropy of black holes[23][24] and allowing for topology-changing processes.[25][26][27] It has also led to many insights in pure mathematics and in ordinary, strongly-coupled gauge theory due to the Gauge/String duality.
In the late 1990s, it was noted that one major hurdle in this endeavor is that the number of possible four-dimensional universes is incredibly large. The small, "curled up" extra dimensions can be compactified in an enormous number of different ways (one estimate is 10500 ) each of which leads to different properties for the low-energy particles and forces. This array of models is known as the string theory landscape.[8]:347
One proposed solution is that many or all of these possibilities are realised in one or another of a huge number of universes, but that only a small number of them are habitable, and hence the fundamental constants of the universe are ultimately the result of the anthropic principle rather than dictated by theory. This has led to criticism of string theory,[28] arguing that it cannot make useful (i.e., original, falsifiable, and verifiable) predictions and regarding it as a pseudoscience. Others disagree,[29] and string theory remains an extremely active topic of investigation in theoretical physics.[citation needed]
Loop quantum gravity[edit]
Current research on loop quantum gravity may eventually play a fundamental role in a ToE, but that is not its primary aim.[30] Also loop quantum gravity introduces a lower bound on the possible length scales.
There have been recent claims that loop quantum gravity may be able to reproduce features resembling the Standard Model. So far only the first generation of fermions (leptons and quarks) with correct parity properties have been modelled by Sundance Bilson-Thompson using preons constituted of braids of spacetime as the building blocks.[31] However, there is no derivation of the Lagrangian that would describe the interactions of such particles, nor is it possible to show that such particles are fermions, nor that the gauge groups or interactions of the Standard Model are realised. Utilization of quantum computing concepts made it possible to demonstrate that the particles are able to survive quantum fluctuations.[32]
This model leads to an interpretation of electric and colour charge as topological quantities (electric as number and chirality of twists carried on the individual ribbons and colour as variants of such twisting for fixed electric charge).
Bilson-Thompson's original paper suggested that the higher-generation fermions could be represented by more complicated braidings, although explicit constructions of these structures were not given. The electric charge, colour, and parity properties of such fermions would arise in the same way as for the first generation. The model was expressly generalized for an infinite number of generations and for the weak force bosons (but not for photons or gluons) in a 2008 paper by Bilson-Thompson, Hackett, Kauffman and Smolin.[33]
Other attempts[edit]
A recent development is the theory of causal fermion systems,[34] giving all three current physical theories (quantum mechanics, general relativity and quantum field theory) as limiting cases.
A recent and very prolific attempt is called Causal Sets. As some of the approaches mentioned above, its direct goal isn't necessarily to achieve a ToE but primarily a working theory of quantum gravity, which might eventually include the standard model and become a candidate for a ToE. Its founding principle is that spacetime is fundamentally discrete and that the spacetime events are related by a partial order. This partial order has the physical meaning of the causality relations between relative past and future distinguishing spacetime events.
Outside the previously mentioned attempts there is Garrett Lisi's E8 proposal. This theory provides an attempt of identifying general relativity and the standard model within the Lie group E8. The theory doesn't provide a novel quantization procedure and the author suggests its quantization might follow the Loop Quantum Gravity approach above mentioned.[35]
Christoph Schiller's Strand Model attempts to account for the gauge symmetry of the Standard Model of particle physics, U(1)×SU(2)×SU(3), with the three Reidemeister moves of knot theory by equating each elementary particle to a different tangle of one, two, or three strands (selectively a long prime knot or unknotted curve, a rational tangle, or a braided tangle respectively).
Present status[edit]
At present, there is no candidate theory of everything that includes the standard model of particle physics and general relativity. For example, no candidate theory is able to calculate the fine structure constant or the mass of the electron. Most particle physicists expect that the outcome of the ongoing experiments – the search for new particles at the large particle accelerators and for dark matter – are needed in order to provide further input for a ToE.
Theory of everything and philosophy[edit]
Main article: Theory of everything (philosophy)
The philosophical implications of a physical ToE are frequently debated. For example, if philosophical physicalism is true, a physical ToE will coincide with a philosophical theory of everything.
The "system building" style of metaphysics attempts to answer all the important questions in a coherent way, providing a complete picture of the world. Plato and Aristotle could be said to have created early examples of comprehensive systems. In the early modern period (17th and 18th centuries), the system-building scope of philosophy is often linked to the rationalist method of philosophy, which is the technique of deducing the nature of the world by pure a priori reason. Examples from the early modern period include the Leibniz's Monadology, Descarte's Dualism, and Spinoza's Monism. Hegel's Absolute idealism and Whitehead's Process philosophy were later systems.
Arguments against a theory of everything[edit]
In parallel to the intense search for a ToE, various scholars have seriously debated the possibility of its discovery.
Gödel's incompleteness theorem[edit]
A number of scholars claim that Gödel's incompleteness theorem suggests that any attempt to construct a ToE is bound to fail. Gödel's theorem, informally stated, asserts that any formal theory expressive enough for elementary arithmetical facts to be expressed and strong enough for them to be proved is either inconsistent (both a statement and its denial can be derived from its axioms) or incomplete, in the sense that there is a true statement that can't be derived in the formal theory.
Stanley Jaki, in his 1966 book The Relevance of Physics, pointed out that, because any "theory of everything" will certainly be a consistent non-trivial mathematical theory, it must be incomplete. He claims that this dooms searches for a deterministic theory of everything.[36] In a later reflection, Jaki states that it is wrong to say that a final theory is impossible, but rather that "when it is on hand one cannot know rigorously that it is a final theory."[37]
Freeman Dyson has stated that "Gödel's theorem implies that pure mathematics is inexhaustible. No matter how many problems we solve, there will always be other problems that cannot be solved within the existing rules. […] Because of Gödel's theorem, physics is inexhaustible too. The laws of physics are a finite set of rules, and include the rules for doing mathematics, so that Gödel's theorem applies to them."[38]
Stephen Hawking was originally a believer in the Theory of Everything but, after considering Gödel's Theorem, concluded that one was not obtainable: "Some people will be very disappointed if there is not an ultimate theory, that can be formulated as a finite number of principles. I used to belong to that camp, but I have changed my mind."[39]
Jürgen Schmidhuber (1997) has argued against this view; he points out that Gödel's theorems are irrelevant for computable physics.[40] In 2000, Schmidhuber explicitly constructed limit-computable, deterministic universes whose pseudo-randomness based on undecidable, Gödel-like halting problems is extremely hard to detect but does not at all prevent formal ToEs describable by very few bits of information.[41]
Related critique was offered by Solomon Feferman,[42] among others. Douglas S. Robertson offers Conway's game of life as an example:[43] The underlying rules are simple and complete, but there are formally undecidable questions about the game's behaviors. Analogously, it may (or may not) be possible to completely state the underlying rules of physics with a finite number of well-defined laws, but there is little doubt that there are questions about the behavior of physical systems which are formally undecidable on the basis of those underlying laws.
Since most physicists would consider the statement of the underlying rules to suffice as the definition of a "theory of everything", most physicists argue that Gödel's Theorem does not mean that a ToE cannot exist. On the other hand, the scholars invoking Gödel's Theorem appear, at least in some cases, to be referring not to the underlying rules, but to the understandability of the behavior of all physical systems, as when Hawking mentions arranging blocks into rectangles, turning the computation of prime numbers into a physical question.[44] This definitional discrepancy may explain some of the disagreement among researchers.
Fundamental limits in accuracy[edit]
No physical theory to date is believed to be precisely accurate. Instead, physics has proceeded by a series of "successive approximations" allowing more and more accurate predictions over a wider and wider range of phenomena. Some physicists believe that it is therefore a mistake to confuse theoretical models with the true nature of reality, and hold that the series of approximations will never terminate in the "truth". Einstein himself expressed this view on occasions.[45] Following this view, we may reasonably hope for a theory of everything which self-consistently incorporates all currently known forces, but we should not expect it to be the final answer.
On the other hand, it is often claimed that, despite the apparently ever-increasing complexity of the mathematics of each new theory, in a deep sense associated with their underlying gauge symmetry and the number of fundamental physical constants, the theories are becoming simpler. If this is the case, the process of simplification cannot continue indefinitely.
Lack of fundamental laws[edit]
There is a philosophical debate within the physics community as to whether a theory of everything deserves to be called the fundamental law of the universe.[46] One view is the hard reductionist position that the ToE is the fundamental law and that all other theories that apply within the universe are a consequence of the ToE. Another view is that emergent laws, which govern the behavior of complex systems, should be seen as equally fundamental. Examples of emergent laws are the second law of thermodynamics and the theory of natural selection. The advocates of emergence argue that emergent laws, especially those describing complex or living systems are independent of the low-level, microscopic laws. In this view, emergent laws are as fundamental as a ToE.
The debates do not make the point at issue clear. Possibly the only issue at stake is the right to apply the high-status term "fundamental" to the respective subjects of research. A well-known one took place between Steven Weinberg and Philip Anderson[citation needed]
Impossibility of being "of everything"[edit]
Although the name "theory of everything" suggests the determinism of Laplace's quotation, this gives a very misleading impression. Determinism is frustrated by the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanical predictions, by the extreme sensitivity to initial conditions that leads to mathematical chaos, by the limitations due to event horizons, and by the extreme mathematical difficulty of applying the theory. Thus, although the current standard model of particle physics "in principle" predicts almost all known non-gravitational phenomena, in practice only a few quantitative results have been derived from the full theory (e.g., the masses of some of the simplest hadrons), and these results (especially the particle masses which are most relevant for low-energy physics) are less accurate than existing experimental measurements. The ToE would almost certainly be even harder to apply for the prediction of experimental results, and thus might be of limited use.
A motive for seeking a ToE,[citation needed] apart from the pure intellectual satisfaction of completing a centuries-long quest, is that prior examples of unification have predicted new phenomena, some of which (e.g., electrical generators) have proved of great practical importance. And like in these prior examples of unification, the ToE would probably allow us to confidently define the domain of validity and residual error of low-energy approximations to the full theory.
Infinite number of onion layers[edit]
Lee Smolin regularly argues that the layers of nature may be like the layers of an onion, and that the number of layers might be infinite.[citation needed] This would imply an infinite sequence of physical theories.
The argument is not universally accepted, because it is not obvious that infinity is a concept that applies to the foundations of nature.
Impossibility of calculation[edit]
Weinberg[47] points out that calculating the precise motion of an actual projectile in the Earth's atmosphere is impossible. So how can we know we have an adequate theory for describing the motion of projectiles? Weinberg suggests that we know principles (Newton's laws of motion and gravitation) that work "well enough" for simple examples, like the motion of planets in empty space. These principles have worked so well on simple examples that we can be reasonably confident they will work for more complex examples. For example, although general relativity includes equations that do not have exact solutions, it is widely accepted as a valid theory because all of its equations with exact solutions have been experimentally verified. Likewise, a ToE must work for a wide range of simple examples in such a way that we can be reasonably confident it will work for every situation in physics.
See also[edit]




Physics portal





Absolute (philosophy)
An Exceptionally Simple Theory of Everything
Argument from beauty
Attractor
Beyond black holes
Beyond the standard model
Big Bang
Brownian motion
Chaos theory
Chronology of the universe
Electroweak interaction
Holographic principle
Mathematical beauty
Mathematical universe hypothesis
Multiverse
Standard Model (mathematical formulation)
Superfluid vacuum theory (SVT)
The Theory of Everything (2014 film) – a feature film about Prof. Stephen Hawking and his first wife Jane Hawking
Timeline of the Big Bang
Zero-energy universe


References[edit]
Footnotes[edit]


^ Steven Weinberg. Dreams of a Final Theory: The Scientist's Search for the Ultimate Laws of Nature. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-307-78786-6. 
^ Stephen W. Hawking (28 February 2006). The Theory of Everything: The Origin and Fate of the Universe. Phoenix Books; Special Anniv. ISBN 978-1-59777-508-3. 
^ a b Carlip, Steven (2001). "Quantum Gravity: a Progress Report". Reports on Progress in Physics 64 (8): 885. arXiv:gr-qc/0108040. Bibcode:2001RPPh...64..885C. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/64/8/301. 
^ Susanna Hornig Priest (14 July 2010). Encyclopedia of Science and Technology Communication. SAGE Publications. ISBN 978-1-4522-6578-0. 
^ Ellis, John (2002). "Physics gets physical (correspondence)". Nature 415 (6875): 957. Bibcode:2002Natur.415..957E. doi:10.1038/415957b. 
^ Ellis, John (1986). "The Superstring: Theory of Everything, or of Nothing?". Nature 323 (6089): 595–598. Bibcode:1986Natur.323..595E. doi:10.1038/323595a0. 
^ Rorres, Chris (2009). "ARCHIMEDES AND THE QUEST FOR THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING". 
^ a b Chris Impey (26 March 2012). How It Began: A Time-Traveler's Guide to the Universe. W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-08002-5. 
^ William E. Burns (1 January 2001). The Scientific Revolution: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-87436-875-8. 
^ Shapin, Steven (1996). The Scientific Revolution. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-75021-3. 
^ Newton, Sir Isaac (1729). The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy II. p. 255. 
^ Sean Carroll (7 January 2010). From Eternity to Here: The Quest for the Ultimate Theory of Time. Penguin Group US. ISBN 978-1-101-15215-7. 
^ Faraday, M. (1850). "Experimental Researches in Electricity. Twenty-Fourth Series. On the Possible Relation of Gravity to Electricity". Abstracts of the Papers Communicated to the Royal Society of London 5: 994–995. doi:10.1098/rspl.1843.0267. 
^ Gorban, Alexander N.; Karlin, Ilya (2013). "Hilbert's 6th Problem: Exact and approximate hydrodynamic manifolds for kinetic equations". Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 51 (2): 187. doi:10.1090/S0273-0979-2013-01439-3. 
^ Dirac, P.A.M. (1929). "Quantum mechanics of many-electron systems". Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A 123 (792): 714. Bibcode:1929RSPSA.123..714D. doi:10.1098/rspa.1929.0094. 
^ Abraham Pais (23 September 1982). Subtle is the Lord : The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-152402-8. 
^ Weinberg (1993), Ch. 5
^ Holloway, M (2005). "The Beauty of Branes" (PDF). Scientific American (Scientific American) 293 (4): 38. Bibcode:2005SciAm.293d..38H. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1005-38. PMID 16196251. Retrieved August 13, 2012. 
^ Nilles, Hans Peter; Ramos-Sánchez, Saúl; Ratz, Michael; Vaudrevange, Patrick K. S. (2008). "From strings to the MSSM". The European Physical Journal C 59 (2): 249. arXiv:0806.3905. Bibcode:2009EPJC...59..249N. doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-008-0740-1. 
^ Beasley, Chris; Heckman, Jonathan J; Vafa, Cumrun (2009). "GUTs and exceptional branes in F-theory — I". Journal of High Energy Physics 2009: 058. arXiv:0802.3391. Bibcode:2009JHEP...01..058B. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2009/01/058. 
^ Donagi, Ron; Wijnholt, Martijn (2008). "Model Building with F-Theory". arXiv:0802.2969v3 [hep-th]. 
^ Heckman, Jonathan J.; Vafa, Cumrun (2008). "Flavor Hierarchy from F-theory". Nuclear Physics B 837: 137–151. arXiv:0811.2417v3. doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2010.05.009. 
^ Strominger, Andrew; Vafa, Cumrun (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379: 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0. 
^ Horowitz, Gary (1996). "Gravitational Wave Astronomy". The Origin of Black Hole Entropy in String Theory. Astrophysics and Space Science Library 211. p. 95. arXiv:gr-qc/9604051. doi:10.1007/978-94-011-5812-1_7. ISBN 978-94-010-6455-2. 
^ Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R.; Strominger, Andrew (1995). "Black hole condensation and the unification of string vacua". Nuclear Physics B 451: 109. arXiv:hep-th/9504145. Bibcode:1995NuPhB.451..109G. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(95)00371-X. 
^ Aspinwall, Paul S.; Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R. (1994). "Calabi-Yau moduli space, mirror manifolds and spacetime topology change in string theory". Nuclear Physics B 416 (2): 414. arXiv:hep-th/9309097. Bibcode:1994NuPhB.416..414A. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(94)90321-2. 
^ Adams, Allan; Liu, Xiao; McGreevy, John; Saltman, Alex; Silverstein, Eva (2005). "Things fall apart: Topology change from winding tachyons". Journal of High Energy Physics 2005 (10): 033. arXiv:hep-th/0502021. Bibcode:2005JHEP...10..033A. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2005/10/033. 
^ Smolin, Lee (2006). The Trouble With Physics: The Rise of String Theory, the Fall of a Science, and What Comes Next. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-55105-7. 
^ Duff, M. J. (2011). "String and M-Theory: Answering the Critics". Foundations of Physics 43: 182. arXiv:1112.0788. Bibcode:2013FoPh...43..182D. doi:10.1007/s10701-011-9618-4. 
^ Potter, Franklin (15 February 2005). "Leptons And Quarks In A Discrete Spacetime" (PDF). Frank Potter's Science Gems. Retrieved 2009-12-01. 
^ Bilson-Thompson, Sundance O.; Markopoulou, Fotini; Smolin, Lee (2007). "Quantum gravity and the standard model". Classical and Quantum Gravity 24 (16): 3975–3994. arXiv:hep-th/0603022. Bibcode:2007CQGra..24.3975B. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/24/16/002. 
^ Castelvecchi, Davide; Valerie Jamieson (August 12, 2006). "You are made of space-time". New Scientist (2564). 
^ Sundance Bilson-Thompson; Jonathan Hackett; Lou Kauffman; Lee Smolin (2008). "Particle Identifications from Symmetries of Braided Ribbon Network Invariants". arXiv:0804.0037 [hep-th]. 
^ F. Finster; J. Kleiner (2015). "Causal fermion systems as a candidate for a unified physical theory". Journal of Physics: Conference Series 626 (2015): 012020. arXiv:1502.03587. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/626/1/012020. 
^ A. G. Lisi (2007). "An Exceptionally Simple Theory of Everything". arXiv:0711.0770 [hep-th]. 
^ Jaki, S.L. (1966). The Relevance of Physics. Chicago Press. pp. 127–130. 
^ Stanley L. Jaki (2004) "A Late Awakening to Gödel in Physics", pp. 8–9.
^ Freeman Dyson, NYRB, May 13, 2004
^ Stephen Hawking, Gödel and the end of physics, July 20, 2002
^ Schmidhuber, Jürgen (1997). A Computer Scientist's View of Life, the Universe, and Everything. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer. pp. 201–208. doi:10.1007/BFb0052071. ISBN 978-3-540-63746-2. 
^ Schmidhuber, Jürgen (2002). "Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit". Sections in: Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science ():587-612 (2002). Section 6 in: the Speed Prior: A New Simplicity Measure Yielding Near-Optimal Computable Predictions. in J. Kivinen and R. H. Sloan, editors, Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT 2002), Sydney, Australia, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 216--228. Springer, 2002 13 (4): 1–5. arXiv:quant-ph/0011122. 
^ Feferman, Solomon (17 November 2006). "The nature and significance of Gödel’s incompleteness theorems" (PDF). Institute for Advanced Study. Retrieved 2009-01-12. 
^ Robertson, Douglas S. (2007). "Goedel's Theorem, the Theory of Everything, and the Future of Science and Mathematics". Complexity 5 (5): 22–27. doi:10.1002/1099-0526(200005/06)5:5<22::AID-CPLX4>3.0.CO;2-0. 
^ Hawking, Stephen (20 July 2002). "Gödel and the end of physics". Retrieved 2009-12-01. 
^ Einstein, letter to Felix Klein, 1917. (On determinism and approximations.) Quoted in Pais (1982), Ch. 17.
^ Weinberg (1993), Ch 2.
^ Weinberg (1993) p. 5


Bibliography[edit]

Pais, Abraham (1982) Subtle is the Lord...: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein (Oxford University Press, Oxford, . Ch. 17, ISBN 0-19-853907-X
Weinberg, Steven (1993) Dreams of a Final Theory: The Search for the Fundamental Laws of Nature, Hutchinson Radius, London, ISBN 0-09-177395-4

External links[edit]

The Elegant Universe, Nova episode about the search for the theory of everything and string theory.
Theory of Everything, freeview video by the Vega Science Trust, BBC and Open University.
The Theory of Everything: Are we getting closer, or is a final theory of matter and the universe impossible? Debate between John Ellis (physicist), Frank Close and Nicholas Maxwell.
Why The World Exists, a discussion between physicist Laura Mersini-Houghton, cosmologist George Francis Rayner Ellis and philosopher David Wallace about dark matter, parallel universes and explaining why these and the present Universe exist.









v
t
e


Theories of gravitation






Standard




Newtonian gravity (NG)



Newton's law of universal gravitation
History of gravitational theory








General relativity (GR)



Introduction
History
Mathematics
Resources
Tests
Post-Newtonian formalism
Linearized gravity
ADM formalism











Alternatives to
general relativity




Paradigms



Classical theories of gravitation
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything








Classical




Einstein–Cartan
Bimetric theories
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism
Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke


Scalar–tensor–vector
Conformal gravity
Scalar theories

Nordström


Whitehead
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
Tensor–vector–scalar
Chameleon
Pressuron









Quantisation




Euclidean quantum gravity
Canonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam


Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
DGP model









Unification



Kaluza–Klein theory

Dilaton


Supergravity








Unification and
quantisation



Noncommutative geometry

Self-creation cosmology


Semiclassical gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum


String theory

M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory


Twistor theory

Twistor string theory










Generalisations /
Extensions of GR



Scale relativity
Liouville gravity
Lovelock theory
(2+1)-dimensional topological gravity
Gauss–Bonnet gravity
Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity











Pre-Newtonian theories
and Toy models



Aristotelian physics
CGHS model
RST model
Mechanical explanations

Fatio–Le Sage
Entropic gravity


Gravitational interaction of antimatter
















v
t
e


World view










 
Related terms









Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts & Factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system















 
Aspects










Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping








Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect








Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship








Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena








Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)








Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables








Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing


















 
Examples










Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz








Economic & political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism








Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism




















Authority control



GND: 7507111-3











 
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theory_of_everything&oldid=716784654"					
Categories: Unsolved problems in physicsPhysics beyond the Standard ModelTheoretical physicsTheories of gravitationHidden categories: All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2015Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010Articles with unsourced statements from November 2010Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers 


Theory of everything
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


					Jump to:					navigation, 					search

This article is about the physical concept.  For other uses, see Theory of everything (disambiguation).


Beyond the Standard Model



Simulated Large Hadron Collider CMS particle detector data depicting a Higgs boson produced by colliding protons decaying into hadron jets and electrons



Standard Model




Evidence


Hierarchy problem
Dark matter
Cosmological constant problem
Strong CP problem
Neutrino oscillation








Theories


Technicolor
Kaluza–Klein theory
Grand Unified Theory
Theory of everything
String theory
Causal fermion systems
Superfluid vacuum theory








Supersymmetry


MSSM
Superstring theory
Supergravity








Quantum gravity


String theory
Loop quantum gravity
Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal fermion systems
Causal sets
Canonical quantum gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory








Experiments


ANNIE
Gran Sasso
INO
LHC
SNO
Super-K
Tevatron
NOνA









v
t
e





A theory of everything (ToE) or final theory, ultimate theory, or master theory is a hypothetical single, all-encompassing, coherent theoretical framework of physics that fully explains and links together all physical aspects of the universe.[1]:6 Finding a ToE is one of the major unsolved problems in physics. Over the past few centuries, two theoretical frameworks have been developed that, as a whole, most closely resemble a ToE. These two theories upon which all modern physics rests are general relativity (GR) and quantum field theory (QFT). GR is a theoretical framework that only focuses on gravity for understanding the universe in regions of both large-scale and high-mass: stars, galaxies, clusters of galaxies, etc. On the other hand, QFT is a theoretical framework that only focuses on three non-gravitational forces for understanding the universe in regions of both small scale and low mass: sub-atomic particles, atoms, molecules, etc. QFT successfully implemented the Standard Model and unified the interactions (so-called Grand Unified Theory) between the three non-gravitational forces: weak, strong, and electromagnetic force.[2]:122
Through years of research, physicists have experimentally confirmed with tremendous accuracy virtually every prediction made by these two theories when in their appropriate domains of applicability. In accordance with their findings, scientists also learned that GR and QFT, as they are currently formulated, are mutually incompatible – they cannot both be right. Since the usual domains of applicability of GR and QFT are so different, most situations require that only one of the two theories be used.[3][4]:842–844 As it turns out, this incompatibility between GR and QFT is only an apparent issue in regions of extremely small-scale and high-mass, such as those that exist within a black hole or during the beginning stages of the universe (i.e., the moment immediately following the Big Bang). To resolve this conflict, a theoretical framework revealing a deeper underlying reality, unifying gravity with the other three interactions, must be discovered to harmoniously integrate the realms of GR and QFT into a seamless whole: a single theory that, in principle, is capable of describing all phenomena. In pursuit of this goal, quantum gravity has recently become an area of active research.
Over the past few decades, a single explanatory framework, called "string theory", has emerged that intends to be the ultimate theory of the universe. Some physicists[who?] believe that, at the beginning of the universe (up to 10−43 seconds after the Big Bang), the four fundamental forces were once a single fundamental force. According to string theory, every particle in the universe, at its most microscopic level (Planck length), consists of varying combinations of vibrating strings (or strands) with preferred patterns of vibration. String theory claims that it is through these specific oscillatory patterns of strings that a particle of unique mass and force charge is created (that is to say, the electron is a type of string that vibrates one way, while the up-quark is a type of string vibrating another way, and so forth).
Initially, the term theory of everything was used with an ironic connotation to refer to various overgeneralized theories. For example, a grandfather of Ijon Tichy — a character from a cycle of Stanisław Lem's science fiction stories of the 1960s — was known to work on the "General Theory of Everything". Physicist John Ellis[5] claims to have introduced the term into the technical literature in an article in Nature in 1986.[6] Over time, the term stuck in popularizations of theoretical physics research.



Contents


1 Historical antecedents

1.1 From ancient Greece to Einstein
1.2 Twentieth century and the nuclear interactions


2 Modern physics

2.1 Conventional sequence of theories
2.2 String theory and M-theory
2.3 Loop quantum gravity
2.4 Other attempts
2.5 Present status


3 Theory of everything and philosophy
4 Arguments against a theory of everything

4.1 Gödel's incompleteness theorem
4.2 Fundamental limits in accuracy
4.3 Lack of fundamental laws
4.4 Impossibility of being "of everything"
4.5 Infinite number of onion layers
4.6 Impossibility of calculation


5 See also
6 References

6.1 Footnotes
6.2 Bibliography


7 External links



Historical antecedents[edit]
From ancient Greece to Einstein[edit]
Archimedes was possibly the first scientist known to have described nature with axioms (or principles) and then deduce new results from them.[7] He thus tried to describe "everything" starting from a few axioms. Any "theory of everything" is similarly expected to be based on axioms and to deduce all observable phenomena from them.[8]:340
The concept of 'atom', introduced by Democritus, unified all phenomena observed in nature as the motion of atoms. In ancient Greek times philosophers speculated that the apparent diversity of observed phenomena was due to a single type of interaction, namely the collisions of atoms. Following atomism, the mechanical philosophy of the 17th century posited that all forces could be ultimately reduced to contact forces between the atoms, then imagined as tiny solid particles.[9]:184[10]
In the late 17th century, Isaac Newton's description of the long-distance force of gravity implied that not all forces in nature result from things coming into contact. Newton's work in his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy dealt with this in a further example of unification, in this case unifying Galileo's work on terrestrial gravity, Kepler's laws of planetary motion and the phenomenon of tides by explaining these apparent actions at a distance under one single law: the law of universal gravitation.[11]
In 1814, building on these results, Laplace famously suggested that a sufficiently powerful intellect could, if it knew the position and velocity of every particle at a given time, along with the laws of nature, calculate the position of any particle at any other time:[12]:ch 7

An intellect which at a certain moment would know all forces that set nature in motion, and all positions of all items of which nature is composed, if this intellect were also vast enough to submit these data to analysis, it would embrace in a single formula the movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those of the tiniest atom; for such an intellect nothing would be uncertain and the future just like the past would be present before its eyes.
— Essai philosophique sur les probabilités, Introduction. 1814

Laplace thus envisaged a combination of gravitation and mechanics as a theory of everything. Modern quantum mechanics implies that uncertainty is inescapable, and thus that Laplace's vision has to be amended: a theory of everything must include gravitation and quantum mechanics.
In 1820, Hans Christian Ørsted discovered a connection between electricity and magnetism, triggering decades of work that culminated in 1865, in James Clerk Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism. During the 19th and early 20th centuries, it gradually became apparent that many common examples of forces – contact forces, elasticity, viscosity, friction, and pressure – result from electrical interactions between the smallest particles of matter.
In his experiments of 1849–50, Michael Faraday was the first to search for a unification of gravity with electricity and magnetism.[13] However, he found no connection.
In 1900, David Hilbert published a famous list of mathematical problems. In Hilbert's sixth problem, he challenged researchers to find an axiomatic basis to all of physics. In this problem he thus asked for what today would be called a theory of everything.[14]
In the late 1920s, the new quantum mechanics showed that the chemical bonds between atoms were examples of (quantum) electrical forces, justifying Dirac's boast that "the underlying physical laws necessary for the mathematical theory of a large part of physics and the whole of chemistry are thus completely known".[15]
After 1915, when Albert Einstein published the theory of gravity (general relativity), the search for a unified field theory combining gravity with electromagnetism began with a renewed interest. In Einstein's day, the strong and the weak forces had not yet been discovered, yet, he found the potential existence of two other distinct forces -gravity and electromagnetism- far more alluring. This launched his thirty-year voyage in search of the so-called "unified field theory" that he hoped would show that these two forces are really manifestations of one grand underlying principle. During these last few decades of his life, this quixotic quest isolated Einstein from the mainstream of physics. Understandably, the mainstream was instead far more excited about the newly emerging framework of quantum mechanics. Einstein wrote to a friend in the early 1940s, "I have become a lonely old chap who is mainly known because he doesn't wear socks and who is exhibited as a curiosity on special occasions." Prominent contributors were Gunnar Nordström, Hermann Weyl, Arthur Eddington, Theodor Kaluza, Oskar Klein, and most notably, Albert Einstein and his collaborators. Einstein intensely searched for, but ultimately failed to find, a unifying theory.[16]:ch 17 (But see:Einstein–Maxwell–Dirac equations.) More than a half a century later, Einstein's dream of discovering a unified theory has become the Holy Grail of modern physics.
Twentieth century and the nuclear interactions[edit]
In the twentieth century, the search for a unifying theory was interrupted by the discovery of the strong and weak nuclear forces (or interactions), which differ both from gravity and from electromagnetism. A further hurdle was the acceptance that in a ToE, quantum mechanics had to be incorporated from the start, rather than emerging as a consequence of a deterministic unified theory, as Einstein had hoped.
Gravity and electromagnetism could always peacefully coexist as entries in a list of classical forces, but for many years it seemed that gravity could not even be incorporated into the quantum framework, let alone unified with the other fundamental forces. For this reason, work on unification, for much of the twentieth century, focused on understanding the three "quantum" forces: electromagnetism and the weak and strong forces. The first two were combined in 1967–68 by Sheldon Glashow, Steven Weinberg, and Abdus Salam into the "electroweak" force.[17] Electroweak unification is a broken symmetry: the electromagnetic and weak forces appear distinct at low energies because the particles carrying the weak force, the W and Z bosons, have non-zero masses of 7001804000000000000♠80.4 GeV/c2 and 7001912000000000000♠91.2 GeV/c2, whereas the photon, which carries the electromagnetic force, is massless. At higher energies Ws and Zs can be created easily and the unified nature of the force becomes apparent.
While the strong and electroweak forces peacefully coexist in the Standard Model of particle physics, they remain distinct. So far, the quest for a theory of everything is thus unsuccessful on two points: neither a unification of the strong and electroweak forces – which Laplace would have called 'contact forces' – has been achieved, nor has a unification of these forces with gravitation been achieved.
Modern physics[edit]
Conventional sequence of theories[edit]
A Theory of Everything would unify all the fundamental interactions of nature: gravitation, strong interaction, weak interaction, and electromagnetism. Because the weak interaction can transform elementary particles from one kind into another, the ToE should also yield a deep understanding of the various different kinds of possible particles. The usual assumed path of theories is given in the following graph, where each unification step leads one level up:




 


 


 


 

Theory of everything

 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 

Quantum gravity

 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

Space Curvature

 


 


 


 

Electronuclear force (GUT)

 




 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

Standard model of cosmology

 


 


 

Standard model of particle physics






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 

Strong interaction
SU(3)

 


 


 


 


 

Electroweak interaction
SU(2) x U(1)Y

 




 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Weak interaction

 


 


 


 

Electromagnetism
U(1)EM




 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Electricity

 


 


 


 

Magnetism

 




 


 


 



In this graph, electroweak unification occurs at around 100 GeV, grand unification is predicted to occur at 1016 GeV, and unification of the GUT force with gravity is expected at the Planck energy, roughly 1019 GeV.
Several Grand Unified Theories (GUTs) have been proposed to unify electromagnetism and the weak and strong forces. Grand unification would imply the existence of an electronuclear force; it is expected to set in at energies of the order of 1016 GeV, far greater than could be reached by any possible Earth-based particle accelerator. Although the simplest GUTs have been experimentally ruled out, the general idea, especially when linked with supersymmetry, remains a favorite candidate in the theoretical physics community. Supersymmetric GUTs seem plausible not only for their theoretical "beauty", but because they naturally produce large quantities of dark matter, and because the inflationary force may be related to GUT physics (although it does not seem to form an inevitable part of the theory). Yet GUTs are clearly not the final answer; both the current standard model and all proposed GUTs are quantum field theories which require the problematic technique of renormalization to yield sensible answers. This is usually regarded as a sign that these are only effective field theories, omitting crucial phenomena relevant only at very high energies.[3]
The final step in the graph requires resolving the separation between quantum mechanics and gravitation, often equated with general relativity. Numerous researchers concentrate their efforts on this specific step; nevertheless, no accepted theory of quantum gravity – and thus no accepted theory of everything – has emerged yet. It is usually assumed that the ToE will also solve the remaining problems of GUTs.
In addition to explaining the forces listed in the graph, a ToE may also explain the status of at least two candidate forces suggested by modern cosmology: an inflationary force and dark energy. Furthermore, cosmological experiments also suggest the existence of dark matter, supposedly composed of fundamental particles outside the scheme of the standard model. However, the existence of these forces and particles has not been proven yet.
String theory and M-theory[edit]



Unsolved problem in physics:
Is string theory, superstring theory, or M-theory, or some other variant on this theme, a step on the road to a "theory of everything", or just a blind alley?
(more unsolved problems in physics)



Since the 1990s, some physicists[who?] believe that 11-dimensional M-theory, which is described in some limits by one of the five perturbative superstring theories, and in another by the maximally-supersymmetric 11-dimensional supergravity, is the theory of everything. However, there is no widespread consensus on this issue.
A surprising property of string/M-theory is that extra dimensions are required for the theory's consistency. In this regard, string theory can be seen as building on the insights of the Kaluza–Klein theory, in which it was realized that applying general relativity to a five-dimensional universe (with one of them small and curled up) looks from the four-dimensional perspective like the usual general relativity together with Maxwell's electrodynamics. This lent credence to the idea of unifying gauge and gravity interactions, and to extra dimensions, but did not address the detailed experimental requirements. Another important property of string theory is its supersymmetry, which together with extra dimensions are the two main proposals for resolving the hierarchy problem of the standard model, which is (roughly) the question of why gravity is so much weaker than any other force. The extra-dimensional solution involves allowing gravity to propagate into the other dimensions while keeping other forces confined to a four-dimensional spacetime, an idea that has been realized with explicit stringy mechanisms.[18]
Research into string theory has been encouraged by a variety of theoretical and experimental factors. On the experimental side, the particle content of the standard model supplemented with neutrino masses fits into a spinor representation of SO(10), a subgroup of E8 that routinely emerges in string theory, such as in heterotic string theory[19] or (sometimes equivalently) in F-theory.[20][21] String theory has mechanisms that may explain why fermions come in three hierarchical generations, and explain the mixing rates between quark generations.[22] On the theoretical side, it has begun to address some of the key questions in quantum gravity, such as resolving the black hole information paradox, counting the correct entropy of black holes[23][24] and allowing for topology-changing processes.[25][26][27] It has also led to many insights in pure mathematics and in ordinary, strongly-coupled gauge theory due to the Gauge/String duality.
In the late 1990s, it was noted that one major hurdle in this endeavor is that the number of possible four-dimensional universes is incredibly large. The small, "curled up" extra dimensions can be compactified in an enormous number of different ways (one estimate is 10500 ) each of which leads to different properties for the low-energy particles and forces. This array of models is known as the string theory landscape.[8]:347
One proposed solution is that many or all of these possibilities are realised in one or another of a huge number of universes, but that only a small number of them are habitable, and hence the fundamental constants of the universe are ultimately the result of the anthropic principle rather than dictated by theory. This has led to criticism of string theory,[28] arguing that it cannot make useful (i.e., original, falsifiable, and verifiable) predictions and regarding it as a pseudoscience. Others disagree,[29] and string theory remains an extremely active topic of investigation in theoretical physics.[citation needed]
Loop quantum gravity[edit]
Current research on loop quantum gravity may eventually play a fundamental role in a ToE, but that is not its primary aim.[30] Also loop quantum gravity introduces a lower bound on the possible length scales.
There have been recent claims that loop quantum gravity may be able to reproduce features resembling the Standard Model. So far only the first generation of fermions (leptons and quarks) with correct parity properties have been modelled by Sundance Bilson-Thompson using preons constituted of braids of spacetime as the building blocks.[31] However, there is no derivation of the Lagrangian that would describe the interactions of such particles, nor is it possible to show that such particles are fermions, nor that the gauge groups or interactions of the Standard Model are realised. Utilization of quantum computing concepts made it possible to demonstrate that the particles are able to survive quantum fluctuations.[32]
This model leads to an interpretation of electric and colour charge as topological quantities (electric as number and chirality of twists carried on the individual ribbons and colour as variants of such twisting for fixed electric charge).
Bilson-Thompson's original paper suggested that the higher-generation fermions could be represented by more complicated braidings, although explicit constructions of these structures were not given. The electric charge, colour, and parity properties of such fermions would arise in the same way as for the first generation. The model was expressly generalized for an infinite number of generations and for the weak force bosons (but not for photons or gluons) in a 2008 paper by Bilson-Thompson, Hackett, Kauffman and Smolin.[33]
Other attempts[edit]
A recent development is the theory of causal fermion systems,[34] giving all three current physical theories (quantum mechanics, general relativity and quantum field theory) as limiting cases.
A recent and very prolific attempt is called Causal Sets. As some of the approaches mentioned above, its direct goal isn't necessarily to achieve a ToE but primarily a working theory of quantum gravity, which might eventually include the standard model and become a candidate for a ToE. Its founding principle is that spacetime is fundamentally discrete and that the spacetime events are related by a partial order. This partial order has the physical meaning of the causality relations between relative past and future distinguishing spacetime events.
Outside the previously mentioned attempts there is Garrett Lisi's E8 proposal. This theory provides an attempt of identifying general relativity and the standard model within the Lie group E8. The theory doesn't provide a novel quantization procedure and the author suggests its quantization might follow the Loop Quantum Gravity approach above mentioned.[35]
Christoph Schiller's Strand Model attempts to account for the gauge symmetry of the Standard Model of particle physics, U(1)×SU(2)×SU(3), with the three Reidemeister moves of knot theory by equating each elementary particle to a different tangle of one, two, or three strands (selectively a long prime knot or unknotted curve, a rational tangle, or a braided tangle respectively).
Present status[edit]
At present, there is no candidate theory of everything that includes the standard model of particle physics and general relativity. For example, no candidate theory is able to calculate the fine structure constant or the mass of the electron. Most particle physicists expect that the outcome of the ongoing experiments – the search for new particles at the large particle accelerators and for dark matter – are needed in order to provide further input for a ToE.
Theory of everything and philosophy[edit]
Main article: Theory of everything (philosophy)
The philosophical implications of a physical ToE are frequently debated. For example, if philosophical physicalism is true, a physical ToE will coincide with a philosophical theory of everything.
The "system building" style of metaphysics attempts to answer all the important questions in a coherent way, providing a complete picture of the world. Plato and Aristotle could be said to have created early examples of comprehensive systems. In the early modern period (17th and 18th centuries), the system-building scope of philosophy is often linked to the rationalist method of philosophy, which is the technique of deducing the nature of the world by pure a priori reason. Examples from the early modern period include the Leibniz's Monadology, Descarte's Dualism, and Spinoza's Monism. Hegel's Absolute idealism and Whitehead's Process philosophy were later systems.
Arguments against a theory of everything[edit]
In parallel to the intense search for a ToE, various scholars have seriously debated the possibility of its discovery.
Gödel's incompleteness theorem[edit]
A number of scholars claim that Gödel's incompleteness theorem suggests that any attempt to construct a ToE is bound to fail. Gödel's theorem, informally stated, asserts that any formal theory expressive enough for elementary arithmetical facts to be expressed and strong enough for them to be proved is either inconsistent (both a statement and its denial can be derived from its axioms) or incomplete, in the sense that there is a true statement that can't be derived in the formal theory.
Stanley Jaki, in his 1966 book The Relevance of Physics, pointed out that, because any "theory of everything" will certainly be a consistent non-trivial mathematical theory, it must be incomplete. He claims that this dooms searches for a deterministic theory of everything.[36] In a later reflection, Jaki states that it is wrong to say that a final theory is impossible, but rather that "when it is on hand one cannot know rigorously that it is a final theory."[37]
Freeman Dyson has stated that "Gödel's theorem implies that pure mathematics is inexhaustible. No matter how many problems we solve, there will always be other problems that cannot be solved within the existing rules. […] Because of Gödel's theorem, physics is inexhaustible too. The laws of physics are a finite set of rules, and include the rules for doing mathematics, so that Gödel's theorem applies to them."[38]
Stephen Hawking was originally a believer in the Theory of Everything but, after considering Gödel's Theorem, concluded that one was not obtainable: "Some people will be very disappointed if there is not an ultimate theory, that can be formulated as a finite number of principles. I used to belong to that camp, but I have changed my mind."[39]
Jürgen Schmidhuber (1997) has argued against this view; he points out that Gödel's theorems are irrelevant for computable physics.[40] In 2000, Schmidhuber explicitly constructed limit-computable, deterministic universes whose pseudo-randomness based on undecidable, Gödel-like halting problems is extremely hard to detect but does not at all prevent formal ToEs describable by very few bits of information.[41]
Related critique was offered by Solomon Feferman,[42] among others. Douglas S. Robertson offers Conway's game of life as an example:[43] The underlying rules are simple and complete, but there are formally undecidable questions about the game's behaviors. Analogously, it may (or may not) be possible to completely state the underlying rules of physics with a finite number of well-defined laws, but there is little doubt that there are questions about the behavior of physical systems which are formally undecidable on the basis of those underlying laws.
Since most physicists would consider the statement of the underlying rules to suffice as the definition of a "theory of everything", most physicists argue that Gödel's Theorem does not mean that a ToE cannot exist. On the other hand, the scholars invoking Gödel's Theorem appear, at least in some cases, to be referring not to the underlying rules, but to the understandability of the behavior of all physical systems, as when Hawking mentions arranging blocks into rectangles, turning the computation of prime numbers into a physical question.[44] This definitional discrepancy may explain some of the disagreement among researchers.
Fundamental limits in accuracy[edit]
No physical theory to date is believed to be precisely accurate. Instead, physics has proceeded by a series of "successive approximations" allowing more and more accurate predictions over a wider and wider range of phenomena. Some physicists believe that it is therefore a mistake to confuse theoretical models with the true nature of reality, and hold that the series of approximations will never terminate in the "truth". Einstein himself expressed this view on occasions.[45] Following this view, we may reasonably hope for a theory of everything which self-consistently incorporates all currently known forces, but we should not expect it to be the final answer.
On the other hand, it is often claimed that, despite the apparently ever-increasing complexity of the mathematics of each new theory, in a deep sense associated with their underlying gauge symmetry and the number of fundamental physical constants, the theories are becoming simpler. If this is the case, the process of simplification cannot continue indefinitely.
Lack of fundamental laws[edit]
There is a philosophical debate within the physics community as to whether a theory of everything deserves to be called the fundamental law of the universe.[46] One view is the hard reductionist position that the ToE is the fundamental law and that all other theories that apply within the universe are a consequence of the ToE. Another view is that emergent laws, which govern the behavior of complex systems, should be seen as equally fundamental. Examples of emergent laws are the second law of thermodynamics and the theory of natural selection. The advocates of emergence argue that emergent laws, especially those describing complex or living systems are independent of the low-level, microscopic laws. In this view, emergent laws are as fundamental as a ToE.
The debates do not make the point at issue clear. Possibly the only issue at stake is the right to apply the high-status term "fundamental" to the respective subjects of research. A well-known one took place between Steven Weinberg and Philip Anderson[citation needed]
Impossibility of being "of everything"[edit]
Although the name "theory of everything" suggests the determinism of Laplace's quotation, this gives a very misleading impression. Determinism is frustrated by the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanical predictions, by the extreme sensitivity to initial conditions that leads to mathematical chaos, by the limitations due to event horizons, and by the extreme mathematical difficulty of applying the theory. Thus, although the current standard model of particle physics "in principle" predicts almost all known non-gravitational phenomena, in practice only a few quantitative results have been derived from the full theory (e.g., the masses of some of the simplest hadrons), and these results (especially the particle masses which are most relevant for low-energy physics) are less accurate than existing experimental measurements. The ToE would almost certainly be even harder to apply for the prediction of experimental results, and thus might be of limited use.
A motive for seeking a ToE,[citation needed] apart from the pure intellectual satisfaction of completing a centuries-long quest, is that prior examples of unification have predicted new phenomena, some of which (e.g., electrical generators) have proved of great practical importance. And like in these prior examples of unification, the ToE would probably allow us to confidently define the domain of validity and residual error of low-energy approximations to the full theory.
Infinite number of onion layers[edit]
Lee Smolin regularly argues that the layers of nature may be like the layers of an onion, and that the number of layers might be infinite.[citation needed] This would imply an infinite sequence of physical theories.
The argument is not universally accepted, because it is not obvious that infinity is a concept that applies to the foundations of nature.
Impossibility of calculation[edit]
Weinberg[47] points out that calculating the precise motion of an actual projectile in the Earth's atmosphere is impossible. So how can we know we have an adequate theory for describing the motion of projectiles? Weinberg suggests that we know principles (Newton's laws of motion and gravitation) that work "well enough" for simple examples, like the motion of planets in empty space. These principles have worked so well on simple examples that we can be reasonably confident they will work for more complex examples. For example, although general relativity includes equations that do not have exact solutions, it is widely accepted as a valid theory because all of its equations with exact solutions have been experimentally verified. Likewise, a ToE must work for a wide range of simple examples in such a way that we can be reasonably confident it will work for every situation in physics.
See also[edit]




Physics portal





Absolute (philosophy)
An Exceptionally Simple Theory of Everything
Argument from beauty
Attractor
Beyond black holes
Beyond the standard model
Big Bang
Brownian motion
Chaos theory
Chronology of the universe
Electroweak interaction
Holographic principle
Mathematical beauty
Mathematical universe hypothesis
Multiverse
Standard Model (mathematical formulation)
Superfluid vacuum theory (SVT)
The Theory of Everything (2014 film) – a feature film about Prof. Stephen Hawking and his first wife Jane Hawking
Timeline of the Big Bang
Zero-energy universe


References[edit]
Footnotes[edit]


^ Steven Weinberg. Dreams of a Final Theory: The Scientist's Search for the Ultimate Laws of Nature. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-307-78786-6. 
^ Stephen W. Hawking (28 February 2006). The Theory of Everything: The Origin and Fate of the Universe. Phoenix Books; Special Anniv. ISBN 978-1-59777-508-3. 
^ a b Carlip, Steven (2001). "Quantum Gravity: a Progress Report". Reports on Progress in Physics 64 (8): 885. arXiv:gr-qc/0108040. Bibcode:2001RPPh...64..885C. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/64/8/301. 
^ Susanna Hornig Priest (14 July 2010). Encyclopedia of Science and Technology Communication. SAGE Publications. ISBN 978-1-4522-6578-0. 
^ Ellis, John (2002). "Physics gets physical (correspondence)". Nature 415 (6875): 957. Bibcode:2002Natur.415..957E. doi:10.1038/415957b. 
^ Ellis, John (1986). "The Superstring: Theory of Everything, or of Nothing?". Nature 323 (6089): 595–598. Bibcode:1986Natur.323..595E. doi:10.1038/323595a0. 
^ Rorres, Chris (2009). "ARCHIMEDES AND THE QUEST FOR THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING". 
^ a b Chris Impey (26 March 2012). How It Began: A Time-Traveler's Guide to the Universe. W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-08002-5. 
^ William E. Burns (1 January 2001). The Scientific Revolution: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-87436-875-8. 
^ Shapin, Steven (1996). The Scientific Revolution. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-75021-3. 
^ Newton, Sir Isaac (1729). The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy II. p. 255. 
^ Sean Carroll (7 January 2010). From Eternity to Here: The Quest for the Ultimate Theory of Time. Penguin Group US. ISBN 978-1-101-15215-7. 
^ Faraday, M. (1850). "Experimental Researches in Electricity. Twenty-Fourth Series. On the Possible Relation of Gravity to Electricity". Abstracts of the Papers Communicated to the Royal Society of London 5: 994–995. doi:10.1098/rspl.1843.0267. 
^ Gorban, Alexander N.; Karlin, Ilya (2013). "Hilbert's 6th Problem: Exact and approximate hydrodynamic manifolds for kinetic equations". Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 51 (2): 187. doi:10.1090/S0273-0979-2013-01439-3. 
^ Dirac, P.A.M. (1929). "Quantum mechanics of many-electron systems". Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A 123 (792): 714. Bibcode:1929RSPSA.123..714D. doi:10.1098/rspa.1929.0094. 
^ Abraham Pais (23 September 1982). Subtle is the Lord : The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-152402-8. 
^ Weinberg (1993), Ch. 5
^ Holloway, M (2005). "The Beauty of Branes" (PDF). Scientific American (Scientific American) 293 (4): 38. Bibcode:2005SciAm.293d..38H. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1005-38. PMID 16196251. Retrieved August 13, 2012. 
^ Nilles, Hans Peter; Ramos-Sánchez, Saúl; Ratz, Michael; Vaudrevange, Patrick K. S. (2008). "From strings to the MSSM". The European Physical Journal C 59 (2): 249. arXiv:0806.3905. Bibcode:2009EPJC...59..249N. doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-008-0740-1. 
^ Beasley, Chris; Heckman, Jonathan J; Vafa, Cumrun (2009). "GUTs and exceptional branes in F-theory — I". Journal of High Energy Physics 2009: 058. arXiv:0802.3391. Bibcode:2009JHEP...01..058B. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2009/01/058. 
^ Donagi, Ron; Wijnholt, Martijn (2008). "Model Building with F-Theory". arXiv:0802.2969v3 [hep-th]. 
^ Heckman, Jonathan J.; Vafa, Cumrun (2008). "Flavor Hierarchy from F-theory". Nuclear Physics B 837: 137–151. arXiv:0811.2417v3. doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2010.05.009. 
^ Strominger, Andrew; Vafa, Cumrun (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379: 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0. 
^ Horowitz, Gary (1996). "Gravitational Wave Astronomy". The Origin of Black Hole Entropy in String Theory. Astrophysics and Space Science Library 211. p. 95. arXiv:gr-qc/9604051. doi:10.1007/978-94-011-5812-1_7. ISBN 978-94-010-6455-2. 
^ Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R.; Strominger, Andrew (1995). "Black hole condensation and the unification of string vacua". Nuclear Physics B 451: 109. arXiv:hep-th/9504145. Bibcode:1995NuPhB.451..109G. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(95)00371-X. 
^ Aspinwall, Paul S.; Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R. (1994). "Calabi-Yau moduli space, mirror manifolds and spacetime topology change in string theory". Nuclear Physics B 416 (2): 414. arXiv:hep-th/9309097. Bibcode:1994NuPhB.416..414A. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(94)90321-2. 
^ Adams, Allan; Liu, Xiao; McGreevy, John; Saltman, Alex; Silverstein, Eva (2005). "Things fall apart: Topology change from winding tachyons". Journal of High Energy Physics 2005 (10): 033. arXiv:hep-th/0502021. Bibcode:2005JHEP...10..033A. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2005/10/033. 
^ Smolin, Lee (2006). The Trouble With Physics: The Rise of String Theory, the Fall of a Science, and What Comes Next. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-55105-7. 
^ Duff, M. J. (2011). "String and M-Theory: Answering the Critics". Foundations of Physics 43: 182. arXiv:1112.0788. Bibcode:2013FoPh...43..182D. doi:10.1007/s10701-011-9618-4. 
^ Potter, Franklin (15 February 2005). "Leptons And Quarks In A Discrete Spacetime" (PDF). Frank Potter's Science Gems. Retrieved 2009-12-01. 
^ Bilson-Thompson, Sundance O.; Markopoulou, Fotini; Smolin, Lee (2007). "Quantum gravity and the standard model". Classical and Quantum Gravity 24 (16): 3975–3994. arXiv:hep-th/0603022. Bibcode:2007CQGra..24.3975B. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/24/16/002. 
^ Castelvecchi, Davide; Valerie Jamieson (August 12, 2006). "You are made of space-time". New Scientist (2564). 
^ Sundance Bilson-Thompson; Jonathan Hackett; Lou Kauffman; Lee Smolin (2008). "Particle Identifications from Symmetries of Braided Ribbon Network Invariants". arXiv:0804.0037 [hep-th]. 
^ F. Finster; J. Kleiner (2015). "Causal fermion systems as a candidate for a unified physical theory". Journal of Physics: Conference Series 626 (2015): 012020. arXiv:1502.03587. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/626/1/012020. 
^ A. G. Lisi (2007). "An Exceptionally Simple Theory of Everything". arXiv:0711.0770 [hep-th]. 
^ Jaki, S.L. (1966). The Relevance of Physics. Chicago Press. pp. 127–130. 
^ Stanley L. Jaki (2004) "A Late Awakening to Gödel in Physics", pp. 8–9.
^ Freeman Dyson, NYRB, May 13, 2004
^ Stephen Hawking, Gödel and the end of physics, July 20, 2002
^ Schmidhuber, Jürgen (1997). A Computer Scientist's View of Life, the Universe, and Everything. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer. pp. 201–208. doi:10.1007/BFb0052071. ISBN 978-3-540-63746-2. 
^ Schmidhuber, Jürgen (2002). "Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit". Sections in: Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science ():587-612 (2002). Section 6 in: the Speed Prior: A New Simplicity Measure Yielding Near-Optimal Computable Predictions. in J. Kivinen and R. H. Sloan, editors, Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT 2002), Sydney, Australia, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 216--228. Springer, 2002 13 (4): 1–5. arXiv:quant-ph/0011122. 
^ Feferman, Solomon (17 November 2006). "The nature and significance of Gödel’s incompleteness theorems" (PDF). Institute for Advanced Study. Retrieved 2009-01-12. 
^ Robertson, Douglas S. (2007). "Goedel's Theorem, the Theory of Everything, and the Future of Science and Mathematics". Complexity 5 (5): 22–27. doi:10.1002/1099-0526(200005/06)5:5<22::AID-CPLX4>3.0.CO;2-0. 
^ Hawking, Stephen (20 July 2002). "Gödel and the end of physics". Retrieved 2009-12-01. 
^ Einstein, letter to Felix Klein, 1917. (On determinism and approximations.) Quoted in Pais (1982), Ch. 17.
^ Weinberg (1993), Ch 2.
^ Weinberg (1993) p. 5


Bibliography[edit]

Pais, Abraham (1982) Subtle is the Lord...: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein (Oxford University Press, Oxford, . Ch. 17, ISBN 0-19-853907-X
Weinberg, Steven (1993) Dreams of a Final Theory: The Search for the Fundamental Laws of Nature, Hutchinson Radius, London, ISBN 0-09-177395-4

External links[edit]

The Elegant Universe, Nova episode about the search for the theory of everything and string theory.
Theory of Everything, freeview video by the Vega Science Trust, BBC and Open University.
The Theory of Everything: Are we getting closer, or is a final theory of matter and the universe impossible? Debate between John Ellis (physicist), Frank Close and Nicholas Maxwell.
Why The World Exists, a discussion between physicist Laura Mersini-Houghton, cosmologist George Francis Rayner Ellis and philosopher David Wallace about dark matter, parallel universes and explaining why these and the present Universe exist.









v
t
e


Theories of gravitation






Standard




Newtonian gravity (NG)



Newton's law of universal gravitation
History of gravitational theory








General relativity (GR)



Introduction
History
Mathematics
Resources
Tests
Post-Newtonian formalism
Linearized gravity
ADM formalism











Alternatives to
general relativity




Paradigms



Classical theories of gravitation
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything








Classical




Einstein–Cartan
Bimetric theories
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism
Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke


Scalar–tensor–vector
Conformal gravity
Scalar theories

Nordström


Whitehead
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
Tensor–vector–scalar
Chameleon
Pressuron









Quantisation




Euclidean quantum gravity
Canonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam


Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
DGP model









Unification



Kaluza–Klein theory

Dilaton


Supergravity








Unification and
quantisation



Noncommutative geometry

Self-creation cosmology


Semiclassical gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum


String theory

M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory


Twistor theory

Twistor string theory










Generalisations /
Extensions of GR



Scale relativity
Liouville gravity
Lovelock theory
(2+1)-dimensional topological gravity
Gauss–Bonnet gravity
Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity











Pre-Newtonian theories
and Toy models



Aristotelian physics
CGHS model
RST model
Mechanical explanations

Fatio–Le Sage
Entropic gravity


Gravitational interaction of antimatter
















v
t
e


World view










 
Related terms









Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts & Factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system















 
Aspects










Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping








Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect








Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship








Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena








Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)








Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables








Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing


















 
Examples










Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz








Economic & political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism








Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism




















Authority control



GND: 7507111-3











 
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theory_of_everything&oldid=716784654"					
Categories: Unsolved problems in physicsPhysics beyond the Standard ModelTheoretical physicsTheories of gravitationHidden categories: All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2015Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010Articles with unsourced statements from November 2010Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers 
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
navigationsearchThis article is about the physical concept.  For other uses, see Theory of everything (disambiguation).


Beyond the Standard Model



Simulated Large Hadron Collider CMS particle detector data depicting a Higgs boson produced by colliding protons decaying into hadron jets and electrons



Standard Model




Evidence


Hierarchy problem
Dark matter
Cosmological constant problem
Strong CP problem
Neutrino oscillation








Theories


Technicolor
Kaluza–Klein theory
Grand Unified Theory
Theory of everything
String theory
Causal fermion systems
Superfluid vacuum theory








Supersymmetry


MSSM
Superstring theory
Supergravity








Quantum gravity


String theory
Loop quantum gravity
Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal fermion systems
Causal sets
Canonical quantum gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory








Experiments


ANNIE
Gran Sasso
INO
LHC
SNO
Super-K
Tevatron
NOνA









v
t
e





A theory of everything (ToE) or final theory, ultimate theory, or master theory is a hypothetical single, all-encompassing, coherent theoretical framework of physics that fully explains and links together all physical aspects of the universe.[1]:6 Finding a ToE is one of the major unsolved problems in physics. Over the past few centuries, two theoretical frameworks have been developed that, as a whole, most closely resemble a ToE. These two theories upon which all modern physics rests are general relativity (GR) and quantum field theory (QFT). GR is a theoretical framework that only focuses on gravity for understanding the universe in regions of both large-scale and high-mass: stars, galaxies, clusters of galaxies, etc. On the other hand, QFT is a theoretical framework that only focuses on three non-gravitational forces for understanding the universe in regions of both small scale and low mass: sub-atomic particles, atoms, molecules, etc. QFT successfully implemented the Standard Model and unified the interactions (so-called Grand Unified Theory) between the three non-gravitational forces: weak, strong, and electromagnetic force.[2]:122
Through years of research, physicists have experimentally confirmed with tremendous accuracy virtually every prediction made by these two theories when in their appropriate domains of applicability. In accordance with their findings, scientists also learned that GR and QFT, as they are currently formulated, are mutually incompatible – they cannot both be right. Since the usual domains of applicability of GR and QFT are so different, most situations require that only one of the two theories be used.[3][4]:842–844 As it turns out, this incompatibility between GR and QFT is only an apparent issue in regions of extremely small-scale and high-mass, such as those that exist within a black hole or during the beginning stages of the universe (i.e., the moment immediately following the Big Bang). To resolve this conflict, a theoretical framework revealing a deeper underlying reality, unifying gravity with the other three interactions, must be discovered to harmoniously integrate the realms of GR and QFT into a seamless whole: a single theory that, in principle, is capable of describing all phenomena. In pursuit of this goal, quantum gravity has recently become an area of active research.
Over the past few decades, a single explanatory framework, called "string theory", has emerged that intends to be the ultimate theory of the universe. Some physicists[who?] believe that, at the beginning of the universe (up to 10−43 seconds after the Big Bang), the four fundamental forces were once a single fundamental force. According to string theory, every particle in the universe, at its most microscopic level (Planck length), consists of varying combinations of vibrating strings (or strands) with preferred patterns of vibration. String theory claims that it is through these specific oscillatory patterns of strings that a particle of unique mass and force charge is created (that is to say, the electron is a type of string that vibrates one way, while the up-quark is a type of string vibrating another way, and so forth).
Initially, the term theory of everything was used with an ironic connotation to refer to various overgeneralized theories. For example, a grandfather of Ijon Tichy — a character from a cycle of Stanisław Lem's science fiction stories of the 1960s — was known to work on the "General Theory of Everything". Physicist John Ellis[5] claims to have introduced the term into the technical literature in an article in Nature in 1986.[6] Over time, the term stuck in popularizations of theoretical physics research.



Contents


1 Historical antecedents

1.1 From ancient Greece to Einstein
1.2 Twentieth century and the nuclear interactions


2 Modern physics

2.1 Conventional sequence of theories
2.2 String theory and M-theory
2.3 Loop quantum gravity
2.4 Other attempts
2.5 Present status


3 Theory of everything and philosophy
4 Arguments against a theory of everything

4.1 Gödel's incompleteness theorem
4.2 Fundamental limits in accuracy
4.3 Lack of fundamental laws
4.4 Impossibility of being "of everything"
4.5 Infinite number of onion layers
4.6 Impossibility of calculation


5 See also
6 References

6.1 Footnotes
6.2 Bibliography


7 External links



Historical antecedents[edit]
From ancient Greece to Einstein[edit]
Archimedes was possibly the first scientist known to have described nature with axioms (or principles) and then deduce new results from them.[7] He thus tried to describe "everything" starting from a few axioms. Any "theory of everything" is similarly expected to be based on axioms and to deduce all observable phenomena from them.[8]:340
The concept of 'atom', introduced by Democritus, unified all phenomena observed in nature as the motion of atoms. In ancient Greek times philosophers speculated that the apparent diversity of observed phenomena was due to a single type of interaction, namely the collisions of atoms. Following atomism, the mechanical philosophy of the 17th century posited that all forces could be ultimately reduced to contact forces between the atoms, then imagined as tiny solid particles.[9]:184[10]
In the late 17th century, Isaac Newton's description of the long-distance force of gravity implied that not all forces in nature result from things coming into contact. Newton's work in his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy dealt with this in a further example of unification, in this case unifying Galileo's work on terrestrial gravity, Kepler's laws of planetary motion and the phenomenon of tides by explaining these apparent actions at a distance under one single law: the law of universal gravitation.[11]
In 1814, building on these results, Laplace famously suggested that a sufficiently powerful intellect could, if it knew the position and velocity of every particle at a given time, along with the laws of nature, calculate the position of any particle at any other time:[12]:ch 7

An intellect which at a certain moment would know all forces that set nature in motion, and all positions of all items of which nature is composed, if this intellect were also vast enough to submit these data to analysis, it would embrace in a single formula the movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those of the tiniest atom; for such an intellect nothing would be uncertain and the future just like the past would be present before its eyes.
— Essai philosophique sur les probabilités, Introduction. 1814

Laplace thus envisaged a combination of gravitation and mechanics as a theory of everything. Modern quantum mechanics implies that uncertainty is inescapable, and thus that Laplace's vision has to be amended: a theory of everything must include gravitation and quantum mechanics.
In 1820, Hans Christian Ørsted discovered a connection between electricity and magnetism, triggering decades of work that culminated in 1865, in James Clerk Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism. During the 19th and early 20th centuries, it gradually became apparent that many common examples of forces – contact forces, elasticity, viscosity, friction, and pressure – result from electrical interactions between the smallest particles of matter.
In his experiments of 1849–50, Michael Faraday was the first to search for a unification of gravity with electricity and magnetism.[13] However, he found no connection.
In 1900, David Hilbert published a famous list of mathematical problems. In Hilbert's sixth problem, he challenged researchers to find an axiomatic basis to all of physics. In this problem he thus asked for what today would be called a theory of everything.[14]
In the late 1920s, the new quantum mechanics showed that the chemical bonds between atoms were examples of (quantum) electrical forces, justifying Dirac's boast that "the underlying physical laws necessary for the mathematical theory of a large part of physics and the whole of chemistry are thus completely known".[15]
After 1915, when Albert Einstein published the theory of gravity (general relativity), the search for a unified field theory combining gravity with electromagnetism began with a renewed interest. In Einstein's day, the strong and the weak forces had not yet been discovered, yet, he found the potential existence of two other distinct forces -gravity and electromagnetism- far more alluring. This launched his thirty-year voyage in search of the so-called "unified field theory" that he hoped would show that these two forces are really manifestations of one grand underlying principle. During these last few decades of his life, this quixotic quest isolated Einstein from the mainstream of physics. Understandably, the mainstream was instead far more excited about the newly emerging framework of quantum mechanics. Einstein wrote to a friend in the early 1940s, "I have become a lonely old chap who is mainly known because he doesn't wear socks and who is exhibited as a curiosity on special occasions." Prominent contributors were Gunnar Nordström, Hermann Weyl, Arthur Eddington, Theodor Kaluza, Oskar Klein, and most notably, Albert Einstein and his collaborators. Einstein intensely searched for, but ultimately failed to find, a unifying theory.[16]:ch 17 (But see:Einstein–Maxwell–Dirac equations.) More than a half a century later, Einstein's dream of discovering a unified theory has become the Holy Grail of modern physics.
Twentieth century and the nuclear interactions[edit]
In the twentieth century, the search for a unifying theory was interrupted by the discovery of the strong and weak nuclear forces (or interactions), which differ both from gravity and from electromagnetism. A further hurdle was the acceptance that in a ToE, quantum mechanics had to be incorporated from the start, rather than emerging as a consequence of a deterministic unified theory, as Einstein had hoped.
Gravity and electromagnetism could always peacefully coexist as entries in a list of classical forces, but for many years it seemed that gravity could not even be incorporated into the quantum framework, let alone unified with the other fundamental forces. For this reason, work on unification, for much of the twentieth century, focused on understanding the three "quantum" forces: electromagnetism and the weak and strong forces. The first two were combined in 1967–68 by Sheldon Glashow, Steven Weinberg, and Abdus Salam into the "electroweak" force.[17] Electroweak unification is a broken symmetry: the electromagnetic and weak forces appear distinct at low energies because the particles carrying the weak force, the W and Z bosons, have non-zero masses of 7001804000000000000♠80.4 GeV/c2 and 7001912000000000000♠91.2 GeV/c2, whereas the photon, which carries the electromagnetic force, is massless. At higher energies Ws and Zs can be created easily and the unified nature of the force becomes apparent.
While the strong and electroweak forces peacefully coexist in the Standard Model of particle physics, they remain distinct. So far, the quest for a theory of everything is thus unsuccessful on two points: neither a unification of the strong and electroweak forces – which Laplace would have called 'contact forces' – has been achieved, nor has a unification of these forces with gravitation been achieved.
Modern physics[edit]
Conventional sequence of theories[edit]
A Theory of Everything would unify all the fundamental interactions of nature: gravitation, strong interaction, weak interaction, and electromagnetism. Because the weak interaction can transform elementary particles from one kind into another, the ToE should also yield a deep understanding of the various different kinds of possible particles. The usual assumed path of theories is given in the following graph, where each unification step leads one level up:




 


 


 


 

Theory of everything

 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 

Quantum gravity

 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

Space Curvature

 


 


 


 

Electronuclear force (GUT)

 




 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

Standard model of cosmology

 


 


 

Standard model of particle physics






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 

Strong interaction
SU(3)

 


 


 


 


 

Electroweak interaction
SU(2) x U(1)Y

 




 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Weak interaction

 


 


 


 

Electromagnetism
U(1)EM




 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Electricity

 


 


 


 

Magnetism

 




 


 


 



In this graph, electroweak unification occurs at around 100 GeV, grand unification is predicted to occur at 1016 GeV, and unification of the GUT force with gravity is expected at the Planck energy, roughly 1019 GeV.
Several Grand Unified Theories (GUTs) have been proposed to unify electromagnetism and the weak and strong forces. Grand unification would imply the existence of an electronuclear force; it is expected to set in at energies of the order of 1016 GeV, far greater than could be reached by any possible Earth-based particle accelerator. Although the simplest GUTs have been experimentally ruled out, the general idea, especially when linked with supersymmetry, remains a favorite candidate in the theoretical physics community. Supersymmetric GUTs seem plausible not only for their theoretical "beauty", but because they naturally produce large quantities of dark matter, and because the inflationary force may be related to GUT physics (although it does not seem to form an inevitable part of the theory). Yet GUTs are clearly not the final answer; both the current standard model and all proposed GUTs are quantum field theories which require the problematic technique of renormalization to yield sensible answers. This is usually regarded as a sign that these are only effective field theories, omitting crucial phenomena relevant only at very high energies.[3]
The final step in the graph requires resolving the separation between quantum mechanics and gravitation, often equated with general relativity. Numerous researchers concentrate their efforts on this specific step; nevertheless, no accepted theory of quantum gravity – and thus no accepted theory of everything – has emerged yet. It is usually assumed that the ToE will also solve the remaining problems of GUTs.
In addition to explaining the forces listed in the graph, a ToE may also explain the status of at least two candidate forces suggested by modern cosmology: an inflationary force and dark energy. Furthermore, cosmological experiments also suggest the existence of dark matter, supposedly composed of fundamental particles outside the scheme of the standard model. However, the existence of these forces and particles has not been proven yet.
String theory and M-theory[edit]



Unsolved problem in physics:
Is string theory, superstring theory, or M-theory, or some other variant on this theme, a step on the road to a "theory of everything", or just a blind alley?
(more unsolved problems in physics)



Since the 1990s, some physicists[who?] believe that 11-dimensional M-theory, which is described in some limits by one of the five perturbative superstring theories, and in another by the maximally-supersymmetric 11-dimensional supergravity, is the theory of everything. However, there is no widespread consensus on this issue.
A surprising property of string/M-theory is that extra dimensions are required for the theory's consistency. In this regard, string theory can be seen as building on the insights of the Kaluza–Klein theory, in which it was realized that applying general relativity to a five-dimensional universe (with one of them small and curled up) looks from the four-dimensional perspective like the usual general relativity together with Maxwell's electrodynamics. This lent credence to the idea of unifying gauge and gravity interactions, and to extra dimensions, but did not address the detailed experimental requirements. Another important property of string theory is its supersymmetry, which together with extra dimensions are the two main proposals for resolving the hierarchy problem of the standard model, which is (roughly) the question of why gravity is so much weaker than any other force. The extra-dimensional solution involves allowing gravity to propagate into the other dimensions while keeping other forces confined to a four-dimensional spacetime, an idea that has been realized with explicit stringy mechanisms.[18]
Research into string theory has been encouraged by a variety of theoretical and experimental factors. On the experimental side, the particle content of the standard model supplemented with neutrino masses fits into a spinor representation of SO(10), a subgroup of E8 that routinely emerges in string theory, such as in heterotic string theory[19] or (sometimes equivalently) in F-theory.[20][21] String theory has mechanisms that may explain why fermions come in three hierarchical generations, and explain the mixing rates between quark generations.[22] On the theoretical side, it has begun to address some of the key questions in quantum gravity, such as resolving the black hole information paradox, counting the correct entropy of black holes[23][24] and allowing for topology-changing processes.[25][26][27] It has also led to many insights in pure mathematics and in ordinary, strongly-coupled gauge theory due to the Gauge/String duality.
In the late 1990s, it was noted that one major hurdle in this endeavor is that the number of possible four-dimensional universes is incredibly large. The small, "curled up" extra dimensions can be compactified in an enormous number of different ways (one estimate is 10500 ) each of which leads to different properties for the low-energy particles and forces. This array of models is known as the string theory landscape.[8]:347
One proposed solution is that many or all of these possibilities are realised in one or another of a huge number of universes, but that only a small number of them are habitable, and hence the fundamental constants of the universe are ultimately the result of the anthropic principle rather than dictated by theory. This has led to criticism of string theory,[28] arguing that it cannot make useful (i.e., original, falsifiable, and verifiable) predictions and regarding it as a pseudoscience. Others disagree,[29] and string theory remains an extremely active topic of investigation in theoretical physics.[citation needed]
Loop quantum gravity[edit]
Current research on loop quantum gravity may eventually play a fundamental role in a ToE, but that is not its primary aim.[30] Also loop quantum gravity introduces a lower bound on the possible length scales.
There have been recent claims that loop quantum gravity may be able to reproduce features resembling the Standard Model. So far only the first generation of fermions (leptons and quarks) with correct parity properties have been modelled by Sundance Bilson-Thompson using preons constituted of braids of spacetime as the building blocks.[31] However, there is no derivation of the Lagrangian that would describe the interactions of such particles, nor is it possible to show that such particles are fermions, nor that the gauge groups or interactions of the Standard Model are realised. Utilization of quantum computing concepts made it possible to demonstrate that the particles are able to survive quantum fluctuations.[32]
This model leads to an interpretation of electric and colour charge as topological quantities (electric as number and chirality of twists carried on the individual ribbons and colour as variants of such twisting for fixed electric charge).
Bilson-Thompson's original paper suggested that the higher-generation fermions could be represented by more complicated braidings, although explicit constructions of these structures were not given. The electric charge, colour, and parity properties of such fermions would arise in the same way as for the first generation. The model was expressly generalized for an infinite number of generations and for the weak force bosons (but not for photons or gluons) in a 2008 paper by Bilson-Thompson, Hackett, Kauffman and Smolin.[33]
Other attempts[edit]
A recent development is the theory of causal fermion systems,[34] giving all three current physical theories (quantum mechanics, general relativity and quantum field theory) as limiting cases.
A recent and very prolific attempt is called Causal Sets. As some of the approaches mentioned above, its direct goal isn't necessarily to achieve a ToE but primarily a working theory of quantum gravity, which might eventually include the standard model and become a candidate for a ToE. Its founding principle is that spacetime is fundamentally discrete and that the spacetime events are related by a partial order. This partial order has the physical meaning of the causality relations between relative past and future distinguishing spacetime events.
Outside the previously mentioned attempts there is Garrett Lisi's E8 proposal. This theory provides an attempt of identifying general relativity and the standard model within the Lie group E8. The theory doesn't provide a novel quantization procedure and the author suggests its quantization might follow the Loop Quantum Gravity approach above mentioned.[35]
Christoph Schiller's Strand Model attempts to account for the gauge symmetry of the Standard Model of particle physics, U(1)×SU(2)×SU(3), with the three Reidemeister moves of knot theory by equating each elementary particle to a different tangle of one, two, or three strands (selectively a long prime knot or unknotted curve, a rational tangle, or a braided tangle respectively).
Present status[edit]
At present, there is no candidate theory of everything that includes the standard model of particle physics and general relativity. For example, no candidate theory is able to calculate the fine structure constant or the mass of the electron. Most particle physicists expect that the outcome of the ongoing experiments – the search for new particles at the large particle accelerators and for dark matter – are needed in order to provide further input for a ToE.
Theory of everything and philosophy[edit]
Main article: Theory of everything (philosophy)
The philosophical implications of a physical ToE are frequently debated. For example, if philosophical physicalism is true, a physical ToE will coincide with a philosophical theory of everything.
The "system building" style of metaphysics attempts to answer all the important questions in a coherent way, providing a complete picture of the world. Plato and Aristotle could be said to have created early examples of comprehensive systems. In the early modern period (17th and 18th centuries), the system-building scope of philosophy is often linked to the rationalist method of philosophy, which is the technique of deducing the nature of the world by pure a priori reason. Examples from the early modern period include the Leibniz's Monadology, Descarte's Dualism, and Spinoza's Monism. Hegel's Absolute idealism and Whitehead's Process philosophy were later systems.
Arguments against a theory of everything[edit]
In parallel to the intense search for a ToE, various scholars have seriously debated the possibility of its discovery.
Gödel's incompleteness theorem[edit]
A number of scholars claim that Gödel's incompleteness theorem suggests that any attempt to construct a ToE is bound to fail. Gödel's theorem, informally stated, asserts that any formal theory expressive enough for elementary arithmetical facts to be expressed and strong enough for them to be proved is either inconsistent (both a statement and its denial can be derived from its axioms) or incomplete, in the sense that there is a true statement that can't be derived in the formal theory.
Stanley Jaki, in his 1966 book The Relevance of Physics, pointed out that, because any "theory of everything" will certainly be a consistent non-trivial mathematical theory, it must be incomplete. He claims that this dooms searches for a deterministic theory of everything.[36] In a later reflection, Jaki states that it is wrong to say that a final theory is impossible, but rather that "when it is on hand one cannot know rigorously that it is a final theory."[37]
Freeman Dyson has stated that "Gödel's theorem implies that pure mathematics is inexhaustible. No matter how many problems we solve, there will always be other problems that cannot be solved within the existing rules. […] Because of Gödel's theorem, physics is inexhaustible too. The laws of physics are a finite set of rules, and include the rules for doing mathematics, so that Gödel's theorem applies to them."[38]
Stephen Hawking was originally a believer in the Theory of Everything but, after considering Gödel's Theorem, concluded that one was not obtainable: "Some people will be very disappointed if there is not an ultimate theory, that can be formulated as a finite number of principles. I used to belong to that camp, but I have changed my mind."[39]
Jürgen Schmidhuber (1997) has argued against this view; he points out that Gödel's theorems are irrelevant for computable physics.[40] In 2000, Schmidhuber explicitly constructed limit-computable, deterministic universes whose pseudo-randomness based on undecidable, Gödel-like halting problems is extremely hard to detect but does not at all prevent formal ToEs describable by very few bits of information.[41]
Related critique was offered by Solomon Feferman,[42] among others. Douglas S. Robertson offers Conway's game of life as an example:[43] The underlying rules are simple and complete, but there are formally undecidable questions about the game's behaviors. Analogously, it may (or may not) be possible to completely state the underlying rules of physics with a finite number of well-defined laws, but there is little doubt that there are questions about the behavior of physical systems which are formally undecidable on the basis of those underlying laws.
Since most physicists would consider the statement of the underlying rules to suffice as the definition of a "theory of everything", most physicists argue that Gödel's Theorem does not mean that a ToE cannot exist. On the other hand, the scholars invoking Gödel's Theorem appear, at least in some cases, to be referring not to the underlying rules, but to the understandability of the behavior of all physical systems, as when Hawking mentions arranging blocks into rectangles, turning the computation of prime numbers into a physical question.[44] This definitional discrepancy may explain some of the disagreement among researchers.
Fundamental limits in accuracy[edit]
No physical theory to date is believed to be precisely accurate. Instead, physics has proceeded by a series of "successive approximations" allowing more and more accurate predictions over a wider and wider range of phenomena. Some physicists believe that it is therefore a mistake to confuse theoretical models with the true nature of reality, and hold that the series of approximations will never terminate in the "truth". Einstein himself expressed this view on occasions.[45] Following this view, we may reasonably hope for a theory of everything which self-consistently incorporates all currently known forces, but we should not expect it to be the final answer.
On the other hand, it is often claimed that, despite the apparently ever-increasing complexity of the mathematics of each new theory, in a deep sense associated with their underlying gauge symmetry and the number of fundamental physical constants, the theories are becoming simpler. If this is the case, the process of simplification cannot continue indefinitely.
Lack of fundamental laws[edit]
There is a philosophical debate within the physics community as to whether a theory of everything deserves to be called the fundamental law of the universe.[46] One view is the hard reductionist position that the ToE is the fundamental law and that all other theories that apply within the universe are a consequence of the ToE. Another view is that emergent laws, which govern the behavior of complex systems, should be seen as equally fundamental. Examples of emergent laws are the second law of thermodynamics and the theory of natural selection. The advocates of emergence argue that emergent laws, especially those describing complex or living systems are independent of the low-level, microscopic laws. In this view, emergent laws are as fundamental as a ToE.
The debates do not make the point at issue clear. Possibly the only issue at stake is the right to apply the high-status term "fundamental" to the respective subjects of research. A well-known one took place between Steven Weinberg and Philip Anderson[citation needed]
Impossibility of being "of everything"[edit]
Although the name "theory of everything" suggests the determinism of Laplace's quotation, this gives a very misleading impression. Determinism is frustrated by the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanical predictions, by the extreme sensitivity to initial conditions that leads to mathematical chaos, by the limitations due to event horizons, and by the extreme mathematical difficulty of applying the theory. Thus, although the current standard model of particle physics "in principle" predicts almost all known non-gravitational phenomena, in practice only a few quantitative results have been derived from the full theory (e.g., the masses of some of the simplest hadrons), and these results (especially the particle masses which are most relevant for low-energy physics) are less accurate than existing experimental measurements. The ToE would almost certainly be even harder to apply for the prediction of experimental results, and thus might be of limited use.
A motive for seeking a ToE,[citation needed] apart from the pure intellectual satisfaction of completing a centuries-long quest, is that prior examples of unification have predicted new phenomena, some of which (e.g., electrical generators) have proved of great practical importance. And like in these prior examples of unification, the ToE would probably allow us to confidently define the domain of validity and residual error of low-energy approximations to the full theory.
Infinite number of onion layers[edit]
Lee Smolin regularly argues that the layers of nature may be like the layers of an onion, and that the number of layers might be infinite.[citation needed] This would imply an infinite sequence of physical theories.
The argument is not universally accepted, because it is not obvious that infinity is a concept that applies to the foundations of nature.
Impossibility of calculation[edit]
Weinberg[47] points out that calculating the precise motion of an actual projectile in the Earth's atmosphere is impossible. So how can we know we have an adequate theory for describing the motion of projectiles? Weinberg suggests that we know principles (Newton's laws of motion and gravitation) that work "well enough" for simple examples, like the motion of planets in empty space. These principles have worked so well on simple examples that we can be reasonably confident they will work for more complex examples. For example, although general relativity includes equations that do not have exact solutions, it is widely accepted as a valid theory because all of its equations with exact solutions have been experimentally verified. Likewise, a ToE must work for a wide range of simple examples in such a way that we can be reasonably confident it will work for every situation in physics.
See also[edit]




Physics portal





Absolute (philosophy)
An Exceptionally Simple Theory of Everything
Argument from beauty
Attractor
Beyond black holes
Beyond the standard model
Big Bang
Brownian motion
Chaos theory
Chronology of the universe
Electroweak interaction
Holographic principle
Mathematical beauty
Mathematical universe hypothesis
Multiverse
Standard Model (mathematical formulation)
Superfluid vacuum theory (SVT)
The Theory of Everything (2014 film) – a feature film about Prof. Stephen Hawking and his first wife Jane Hawking
Timeline of the Big Bang
Zero-energy universe


References[edit]
Footnotes[edit]


^ Steven Weinberg. Dreams of a Final Theory: The Scientist's Search for the Ultimate Laws of Nature. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-307-78786-6. 
^ Stephen W. Hawking (28 February 2006). The Theory of Everything: The Origin and Fate of the Universe. Phoenix Books; Special Anniv. ISBN 978-1-59777-508-3. 
^ a b Carlip, Steven (2001). "Quantum Gravity: a Progress Report". Reports on Progress in Physics 64 (8): 885. arXiv:gr-qc/0108040. Bibcode:2001RPPh...64..885C. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/64/8/301. 
^ Susanna Hornig Priest (14 July 2010). Encyclopedia of Science and Technology Communication. SAGE Publications. ISBN 978-1-4522-6578-0. 
^ Ellis, John (2002). "Physics gets physical (correspondence)". Nature 415 (6875): 957. Bibcode:2002Natur.415..957E. doi:10.1038/415957b. 
^ Ellis, John (1986). "The Superstring: Theory of Everything, or of Nothing?". Nature 323 (6089): 595–598. Bibcode:1986Natur.323..595E. doi:10.1038/323595a0. 
^ Rorres, Chris (2009). "ARCHIMEDES AND THE QUEST FOR THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING". 
^ a b Chris Impey (26 March 2012). How It Began: A Time-Traveler's Guide to the Universe. W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-08002-5. 
^ William E. Burns (1 January 2001). The Scientific Revolution: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-87436-875-8. 
^ Shapin, Steven (1996). The Scientific Revolution. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-75021-3. 
^ Newton, Sir Isaac (1729). The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy II. p. 255. 
^ Sean Carroll (7 January 2010). From Eternity to Here: The Quest for the Ultimate Theory of Time. Penguin Group US. ISBN 978-1-101-15215-7. 
^ Faraday, M. (1850). "Experimental Researches in Electricity. Twenty-Fourth Series. On the Possible Relation of Gravity to Electricity". Abstracts of the Papers Communicated to the Royal Society of London 5: 994–995. doi:10.1098/rspl.1843.0267. 
^ Gorban, Alexander N.; Karlin, Ilya (2013). "Hilbert's 6th Problem: Exact and approximate hydrodynamic manifolds for kinetic equations". Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 51 (2): 187. doi:10.1090/S0273-0979-2013-01439-3. 
^ Dirac, P.A.M. (1929). "Quantum mechanics of many-electron systems". Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A 123 (792): 714. Bibcode:1929RSPSA.123..714D. doi:10.1098/rspa.1929.0094. 
^ Abraham Pais (23 September 1982). Subtle is the Lord : The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-152402-8. 
^ Weinberg (1993), Ch. 5
^ Holloway, M (2005). "The Beauty of Branes" (PDF). Scientific American (Scientific American) 293 (4): 38. Bibcode:2005SciAm.293d..38H. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1005-38. PMID 16196251. Retrieved August 13, 2012. 
^ Nilles, Hans Peter; Ramos-Sánchez, Saúl; Ratz, Michael; Vaudrevange, Patrick K. S. (2008). "From strings to the MSSM". The European Physical Journal C 59 (2): 249. arXiv:0806.3905. Bibcode:2009EPJC...59..249N. doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-008-0740-1. 
^ Beasley, Chris; Heckman, Jonathan J; Vafa, Cumrun (2009). "GUTs and exceptional branes in F-theory — I". Journal of High Energy Physics 2009: 058. arXiv:0802.3391. Bibcode:2009JHEP...01..058B. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2009/01/058. 
^ Donagi, Ron; Wijnholt, Martijn (2008). "Model Building with F-Theory". arXiv:0802.2969v3 [hep-th]. 
^ Heckman, Jonathan J.; Vafa, Cumrun (2008). "Flavor Hierarchy from F-theory". Nuclear Physics B 837: 137–151. arXiv:0811.2417v3. doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2010.05.009. 
^ Strominger, Andrew; Vafa, Cumrun (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379: 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0. 
^ Horowitz, Gary (1996). "Gravitational Wave Astronomy". The Origin of Black Hole Entropy in String Theory. Astrophysics and Space Science Library 211. p. 95. arXiv:gr-qc/9604051. doi:10.1007/978-94-011-5812-1_7. ISBN 978-94-010-6455-2. 
^ Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R.; Strominger, Andrew (1995). "Black hole condensation and the unification of string vacua". Nuclear Physics B 451: 109. arXiv:hep-th/9504145. Bibcode:1995NuPhB.451..109G. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(95)00371-X. 
^ Aspinwall, Paul S.; Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R. (1994). "Calabi-Yau moduli space, mirror manifolds and spacetime topology change in string theory". Nuclear Physics B 416 (2): 414. arXiv:hep-th/9309097. Bibcode:1994NuPhB.416..414A. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(94)90321-2. 
^ Adams, Allan; Liu, Xiao; McGreevy, John; Saltman, Alex; Silverstein, Eva (2005). "Things fall apart: Topology change from winding tachyons". Journal of High Energy Physics 2005 (10): 033. arXiv:hep-th/0502021. Bibcode:2005JHEP...10..033A. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2005/10/033. 
^ Smolin, Lee (2006). The Trouble With Physics: The Rise of String Theory, the Fall of a Science, and What Comes Next. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-55105-7. 
^ Duff, M. J. (2011). "String and M-Theory: Answering the Critics". Foundations of Physics 43: 182. arXiv:1112.0788. Bibcode:2013FoPh...43..182D. doi:10.1007/s10701-011-9618-4. 
^ Potter, Franklin (15 February 2005). "Leptons And Quarks In A Discrete Spacetime" (PDF). Frank Potter's Science Gems. Retrieved 2009-12-01. 
^ Bilson-Thompson, Sundance O.; Markopoulou, Fotini; Smolin, Lee (2007). "Quantum gravity and the standard model". Classical and Quantum Gravity 24 (16): 3975–3994. arXiv:hep-th/0603022. Bibcode:2007CQGra..24.3975B. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/24/16/002. 
^ Castelvecchi, Davide; Valerie Jamieson (August 12, 2006). "You are made of space-time". New Scientist (2564). 
^ Sundance Bilson-Thompson; Jonathan Hackett; Lou Kauffman; Lee Smolin (2008). "Particle Identifications from Symmetries of Braided Ribbon Network Invariants". arXiv:0804.0037 [hep-th]. 
^ F. Finster; J. Kleiner (2015). "Causal fermion systems as a candidate for a unified physical theory". Journal of Physics: Conference Series 626 (2015): 012020. arXiv:1502.03587. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/626/1/012020. 
^ A. G. Lisi (2007). "An Exceptionally Simple Theory of Everything". arXiv:0711.0770 [hep-th]. 
^ Jaki, S.L. (1966). The Relevance of Physics. Chicago Press. pp. 127–130. 
^ Stanley L. Jaki (2004) "A Late Awakening to Gödel in Physics", pp. 8–9.
^ Freeman Dyson, NYRB, May 13, 2004
^ Stephen Hawking, Gödel and the end of physics, July 20, 2002
^ Schmidhuber, Jürgen (1997). A Computer Scientist's View of Life, the Universe, and Everything. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer. pp. 201–208. doi:10.1007/BFb0052071. ISBN 978-3-540-63746-2. 
^ Schmidhuber, Jürgen (2002). "Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit". Sections in: Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science ():587-612 (2002). Section 6 in: the Speed Prior: A New Simplicity Measure Yielding Near-Optimal Computable Predictions. in J. Kivinen and R. H. Sloan, editors, Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT 2002), Sydney, Australia, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 216--228. Springer, 2002 13 (4): 1–5. arXiv:quant-ph/0011122. 
^ Feferman, Solomon (17 November 2006). "The nature and significance of Gödel’s incompleteness theorems" (PDF). Institute for Advanced Study. Retrieved 2009-01-12. 
^ Robertson, Douglas S. (2007). "Goedel's Theorem, the Theory of Everything, and the Future of Science and Mathematics". Complexity 5 (5): 22–27. doi:10.1002/1099-0526(200005/06)5:5<22::AID-CPLX4>3.0.CO;2-0. 
^ Hawking, Stephen (20 July 2002). "Gödel and the end of physics". Retrieved 2009-12-01. 
^ Einstein, letter to Felix Klein, 1917. (On determinism and approximations.) Quoted in Pais (1982), Ch. 17.
^ Weinberg (1993), Ch 2.
^ Weinberg (1993) p. 5


Bibliography[edit]

Pais, Abraham (1982) Subtle is the Lord...: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein (Oxford University Press, Oxford, . Ch. 17, ISBN 0-19-853907-X
Weinberg, Steven (1993) Dreams of a Final Theory: The Search for the Fundamental Laws of Nature, Hutchinson Radius, London, ISBN 0-09-177395-4

External links[edit]

The Elegant Universe, Nova episode about the search for the theory of everything and string theory.
Theory of Everything, freeview video by the Vega Science Trust, BBC and Open University.
The Theory of Everything: Are we getting closer, or is a final theory of matter and the universe impossible? Debate between John Ellis (physicist), Frank Close and Nicholas Maxwell.
Why The World Exists, a discussion between physicist Laura Mersini-Houghton, cosmologist George Francis Rayner Ellis and philosopher David Wallace about dark matter, parallel universes and explaining why these and the present Universe exist.









v
t
e


Theories of gravitation






Standard




Newtonian gravity (NG)



Newton's law of universal gravitation
History of gravitational theory








General relativity (GR)



Introduction
History
Mathematics
Resources
Tests
Post-Newtonian formalism
Linearized gravity
ADM formalism











Alternatives to
general relativity




Paradigms



Classical theories of gravitation
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything








Classical




Einstein–Cartan
Bimetric theories
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism
Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke


Scalar–tensor–vector
Conformal gravity
Scalar theories

Nordström


Whitehead
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
Tensor–vector–scalar
Chameleon
Pressuron









Quantisation




Euclidean quantum gravity
Canonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam


Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
DGP model









Unification



Kaluza–Klein theory

Dilaton


Supergravity








Unification and
quantisation



Noncommutative geometry

Self-creation cosmology


Semiclassical gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum


String theory

M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory


Twistor theory

Twistor string theory










Generalisations /
Extensions of GR



Scale relativity
Liouville gravity
Lovelock theory
(2+1)-dimensional topological gravity
Gauss–Bonnet gravity
Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity











Pre-Newtonian theories
and Toy models



Aristotelian physics
CGHS model
RST model
Mechanical explanations

Fatio–Le Sage
Entropic gravity


Gravitational interaction of antimatter
















v
t
e


World view










 
Related terms









Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts & Factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system















 
Aspects










Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping








Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect








Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship








Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena








Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)








Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables








Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing


















 
Examples










Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz








Economic & political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism








Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism




















Authority control



GND: 7507111-3











This article is about the physical concept.  For other uses, see Theory of everything (disambiguation).Theory of everything (disambiguation)

Beyond the Standard Model



Simulated Large Hadron Collider CMS particle detector data depicting a Higgs boson produced by colliding protons decaying into hadron jets and electrons



Standard Model




Evidence


Hierarchy problem
Dark matter
Cosmological constant problem
Strong CP problem
Neutrino oscillation








Theories


Technicolor
Kaluza–Klein theory
Grand Unified Theory
Theory of everything
String theory
Causal fermion systems
Superfluid vacuum theory








Supersymmetry


MSSM
Superstring theory
Supergravity








Quantum gravity


String theory
Loop quantum gravity
Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal fermion systems
Causal sets
Canonical quantum gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory








Experiments


ANNIE
Gran Sasso
INO
LHC
SNO
Super-K
Tevatron
NOνA









v
t
e





Beyond the Standard Model
Beyond the Standard ModelBeyond the Standard Model

Simulated Large Hadron Collider CMS particle detector data depicting a Higgs boson produced by colliding protons decaying into hadron jets and electrons


Simulated Large Hadron Collider CMS particle detector data depicting a Higgs boson produced by colliding protons decaying into hadron jets and electrons
Simulated Large Hadron Collider CMS particle detector data depicting a Higgs boson produced by colliding protons decaying into hadron jets and electronsLarge Hadron ColliderHiggs boson
Standard Model
Standard ModelStandard Model


Evidence


Hierarchy problem
Dark matter
Cosmological constant problem
Strong CP problem
Neutrino oscillation






Evidence


Hierarchy problem
Dark matter
Cosmological constant problem
Strong CP problem
Neutrino oscillation




Evidence


Hierarchy problem
Dark matter
Cosmological constant problem
Strong CP problem
Neutrino oscillation


Evidence

Hierarchy problem
Dark matter
Cosmological constant problem
Strong CP problem
Neutrino oscillation


Hierarchy problem
Dark matter
Cosmological constant problem
Strong CP problem
Neutrino oscillation
Hierarchy problemHierarchy problemDark matterDark matterCosmological constant problemCosmological constant problemStrong CP problemStrong CP problemNeutrino oscillationNeutrino oscillation


Theories


Technicolor
Kaluza–Klein theory
Grand Unified Theory
Theory of everything
String theory
Causal fermion systems
Superfluid vacuum theory






Theories


Technicolor
Kaluza–Klein theory
Grand Unified Theory
Theory of everything
String theory
Causal fermion systems
Superfluid vacuum theory




Theories


Technicolor
Kaluza–Klein theory
Grand Unified Theory
Theory of everything
String theory
Causal fermion systems
Superfluid vacuum theory


Theories

Technicolor
Kaluza–Klein theory
Grand Unified Theory
Theory of everything
String theory
Causal fermion systems
Superfluid vacuum theory


Technicolor
Kaluza–Klein theory
Grand Unified Theory
Theory of everything
String theory
Causal fermion systems
Superfluid vacuum theory
TechnicolorTechnicolorKaluza–Klein theoryKaluza–Klein theoryGrand Unified TheoryGrand Unified TheoryTheory of everythingTheory of everythingString theoryString theoryCausal fermion systemsCausal fermion systemsSuperfluid vacuum theorySuperfluid vacuum theory


Supersymmetry


MSSM
Superstring theory
Supergravity






Supersymmetry


MSSM
Superstring theory
Supergravity




Supersymmetry


MSSM
Superstring theory
Supergravity


SupersymmetrySupersymmetry

MSSM
Superstring theory
Supergravity


MSSM
Superstring theory
Supergravity
MSSMMSSMSuperstring theorySuperstring theorySupergravitySupergravity


Quantum gravity


String theory
Loop quantum gravity
Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal fermion systems
Causal sets
Canonical quantum gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory






Quantum gravity


String theory
Loop quantum gravity
Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal fermion systems
Causal sets
Canonical quantum gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory




Quantum gravity


String theory
Loop quantum gravity
Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal fermion systems
Causal sets
Canonical quantum gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory


Quantum gravityQuantum gravity

String theory
Loop quantum gravity
Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal fermion systems
Causal sets
Canonical quantum gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory


String theory
Loop quantum gravity
Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal fermion systems
Causal sets
Canonical quantum gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory
String theoryString theoryLoop quantum gravityLoop quantum gravityCausal dynamical triangulationCausal dynamical triangulationCausal fermion systemsCausal fermion systemsCausal setsCausal setsCanonical quantum gravityCanonical quantum gravitySuperfluid vacuum theorySuperfluid vacuum theory


Experiments


ANNIE
Gran Sasso
INO
LHC
SNO
Super-K
Tevatron
NOνA






Experiments


ANNIE
Gran Sasso
INO
LHC
SNO
Super-K
Tevatron
NOνA




Experiments


ANNIE
Gran Sasso
INO
LHC
SNO
Super-K
Tevatron
NOνA


Experiments

ANNIE
Gran Sasso
INO
LHC
SNO
Super-K
Tevatron
NOνA


ANNIE
Gran Sasso
INO
LHC
SNO
Super-K
Tevatron
NOνA
ANNIEANNIEGran SassoGran SassoINOINOLHCLHCSNOSNOSuper-KSuper-KTevatronTevatronNOνANOνA



v
t
e






v
t
e




v
t
e


v
t
e
vvvttteeeA theory of everything (ToE) or final theory, ultimate theory, or master theory is a hypothetical single, all-encompassing, coherent theoretical framework of physics that fully explains and links together all physical aspects of the universe.[1]:6 Finding a ToE is one of the major unsolved problems in physics. Over the past few centuries, two theoretical frameworks have been developed that, as a whole, most closely resemble a ToE. These two theories upon which all modern physics rests are general relativity (GR) and quantum field theory (QFT). GR is a theoretical framework that only focuses on gravity for understanding the universe in regions of both large-scale and high-mass: stars, galaxies, clusters of galaxies, etc. On the other hand, QFT is a theoretical framework that only focuses on three non-gravitational forces for understanding the universe in regions of both small scale and low mass: sub-atomic particles, atoms, molecules, etc. QFT successfully implemented the Standard Model and unified the interactions (so-called Grand Unified Theory) between the three non-gravitational forces: weak, strong, and electromagnetic force.[2]:122theory of everythingToEfinal theoryultimate theorymaster theorytheoretical framework of physicsuniverse[1][1]:6unsolved problems in physicsgeneral relativityquantum field theorygravityStandard ModelGrand Unified Theoryweakstrongelectromagnetic[2][2]:122Through years of research, physicists have experimentally confirmed with tremendous accuracy virtually every prediction made by these two theories when in their appropriate domains of applicability. In accordance with their findings, scientists also learned that GR and QFT, as they are currently formulated, are mutually incompatible – they cannot both be right. Since the usual domains of applicability of GR and QFT are so different, most situations require that only one of the two theories be used.[3][4]:842–844 As it turns out, this incompatibility between GR and QFT is only an apparent issue in regions of extremely small-scale and high-mass, such as those that exist within a black hole or during the beginning stages of the universe (i.e., the moment immediately following the Big Bang). To resolve this conflict, a theoretical framework revealing a deeper underlying reality, unifying gravity with the other three interactions, must be discovered to harmoniously integrate the realms of GR and QFT into a seamless whole: a single theory that, in principle, is capable of describing all phenomena. In pursuit of this goal, quantum gravity has recently become an area of active research.[3][3][4][4]:842–844Big Bangquantum gravityOver the past few decades, a single explanatory framework, called "string theory", has emerged that intends to be the ultimate theory of the universe. Some physicists[who?] believe that, at the beginning of the universe (up to 10−43 seconds after the Big Bang), the four fundamental forces were once a single fundamental force. According to string theory, every particle in the universe, at its most microscopic level (Planck length), consists of varying combinations of vibrating strings (or strands) with preferred patterns of vibration. String theory claims that it is through these specific oscillatory patterns of strings that a particle of unique mass and force charge is created (that is to say, the electron is a type of string that vibrates one way, while the up-quark is a type of string vibrating another way, and so forth).string theory[who?]who?who?who?beginning of the universe−43Planck lengthInitially, the term theory of everything was used with an ironic connotation to refer to various overgeneralized theories. For example, a grandfather of Ijon Tichy — a character from a cycle of Stanisław Lem's science fiction stories of the 1960s — was known to work on the "General Theory of Everything". Physicist John Ellis[5] claims to have introduced the term into the technical literature in an article in Nature in 1986.[6] Over time, the term stuck in popularizations of theoretical physics research.theory of everythingIjon TichyStanisław Lemscience fictionGeneral Theory of EverythingJohn Ellis[5][5]NatureNature[6][6]theoretical physics

Contents


1 Historical antecedents

1.1 From ancient Greece to Einstein
1.2 Twentieth century and the nuclear interactions


2 Modern physics

2.1 Conventional sequence of theories
2.2 String theory and M-theory
2.3 Loop quantum gravity
2.4 Other attempts
2.5 Present status


3 Theory of everything and philosophy
4 Arguments against a theory of everything

4.1 Gödel's incompleteness theorem
4.2 Fundamental limits in accuracy
4.3 Lack of fundamental laws
4.4 Impossibility of being "of everything"
4.5 Infinite number of onion layers
4.6 Impossibility of calculation


5 See also
6 References

6.1 Footnotes
6.2 Bibliography


7 External links


Contents
Contents
1 Historical antecedents

1.1 From ancient Greece to Einstein
1.2 Twentieth century and the nuclear interactions


2 Modern physics

2.1 Conventional sequence of theories
2.2 String theory and M-theory
2.3 Loop quantum gravity
2.4 Other attempts
2.5 Present status


3 Theory of everything and philosophy
4 Arguments against a theory of everything

4.1 Gödel's incompleteness theorem
4.2 Fundamental limits in accuracy
4.3 Lack of fundamental laws
4.4 Impossibility of being "of everything"
4.5 Infinite number of onion layers
4.6 Impossibility of calculation


5 See also
6 References

6.1 Footnotes
6.2 Bibliography


7 External links
1 Historical antecedents

1.1 From ancient Greece to Einstein
1.2 Twentieth century and the nuclear interactions

1 Historical antecedents1Historical antecedents
1.1 From ancient Greece to Einstein
1.2 Twentieth century and the nuclear interactions
1.1 From ancient Greece to Einstein1.1 From ancient Greece to Einstein1.1From ancient Greece to Einstein1.2 Twentieth century and the nuclear interactions1.2 Twentieth century and the nuclear interactions1.2Twentieth century and the nuclear interactions2 Modern physics

2.1 Conventional sequence of theories
2.2 String theory and M-theory
2.3 Loop quantum gravity
2.4 Other attempts
2.5 Present status

2 Modern physics2Modern physics
2.1 Conventional sequence of theories
2.2 String theory and M-theory
2.3 Loop quantum gravity
2.4 Other attempts
2.5 Present status
2.1 Conventional sequence of theories2.1 Conventional sequence of theories2.1Conventional sequence of theories2.2 String theory and M-theory2.2 String theory and M-theory2.2String theory and M-theory2.3 Loop quantum gravity2.3 Loop quantum gravity2.3Loop quantum gravity2.4 Other attempts2.4 Other attempts2.4Other attempts2.5 Present status2.5 Present status2.5Present status3 Theory of everything and philosophy3 Theory of everything and philosophy3Theory of everything and philosophy4 Arguments against a theory of everything

4.1 Gödel's incompleteness theorem
4.2 Fundamental limits in accuracy
4.3 Lack of fundamental laws
4.4 Impossibility of being "of everything"
4.5 Infinite number of onion layers
4.6 Impossibility of calculation

4 Arguments against a theory of everything4Arguments against a theory of everything
4.1 Gödel's incompleteness theorem
4.2 Fundamental limits in accuracy
4.3 Lack of fundamental laws
4.4 Impossibility of being "of everything"
4.5 Infinite number of onion layers
4.6 Impossibility of calculation
4.1 Gödel's incompleteness theorem4.1 Gödel's incompleteness theorem4.1Gödel's incompleteness theorem4.2 Fundamental limits in accuracy4.2 Fundamental limits in accuracy4.2Fundamental limits in accuracy4.3 Lack of fundamental laws4.3 Lack of fundamental laws4.3Lack of fundamental laws4.4 Impossibility of being "of everything"4.4 Impossibility of being "of everything"4.4Impossibility of being "of everything"4.5 Infinite number of onion layers4.5 Infinite number of onion layers4.5Infinite number of onion layers4.6 Impossibility of calculation4.6 Impossibility of calculation4.6Impossibility of calculation5 See also5 See also5See also6 References

6.1 Footnotes
6.2 Bibliography

6 References6References
6.1 Footnotes
6.2 Bibliography
6.1 Footnotes6.1 Footnotes6.1Footnotes6.2 Bibliography6.2 Bibliography6.2Bibliography7 External links7 External links7External linksHistorical antecedents[edit]Historical antecedents[edit][edit]From ancient Greece to Einstein[edit]From ancient Greece to Einstein[edit][edit]Archimedes was possibly the first scientist known to have described nature with axioms (or principles) and then deduce new results from them.[7] He thus tried to describe "everything" starting from a few axioms. Any "theory of everything" is similarly expected to be based on axioms and to deduce all observable phenomena from them.[8]:340Archimedes[7][7][8][8]:340The concept of 'atom', introduced by Democritus, unified all phenomena observed in nature as the motion of atoms. In ancient Greek times philosophers speculated that the apparent diversity of observed phenomena was due to a single type of interaction, namely the collisions of atoms. Following atomism, the mechanical philosophy of the 17th century posited that all forces could be ultimately reduced to contact forces between the atoms, then imagined as tiny solid particles.[9]:184[10]Democritusancient Greekphilosophersatomismmechanical philosophycontact forces[9][9]:184[10][10]In the late 17th century, Isaac Newton's description of the long-distance force of gravity implied that not all forces in nature result from things coming into contact. Newton's work in his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy dealt with this in a further example of unification, in this case unifying Galileo's work on terrestrial gravity, Kepler's laws of planetary motion and the phenomenon of tides by explaining these apparent actions at a distance under one single law: the law of universal gravitation.[11]Isaac NewtonMathematical Principles of Natural PhilosophyMathematical Principles of Natural PhilosophyGalileoKeplertidesuniversal gravitation[11][11]In 1814, building on these results, Laplace famously suggested that a sufficiently powerful intellect could, if it knew the position and velocity of every particle at a given time, along with the laws of nature, calculate the position of any particle at any other time:[12]:ch 7Laplacesufficiently powerful intellect[12][12]:ch 7
An intellect which at a certain moment would know all forces that set nature in motion, and all positions of all items of which nature is composed, if this intellect were also vast enough to submit these data to analysis, it would embrace in a single formula the movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those of the tiniest atom; for such an intellect nothing would be uncertain and the future just like the past would be present before its eyes.
— Essai philosophique sur les probabilités, Introduction. 1814
An intellect which at a certain moment would know all forces that set nature in motion, and all positions of all items of which nature is composed, if this intellect were also vast enough to submit these data to analysis, it would embrace in a single formula the movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those of the tiniest atom; for such an intellect nothing would be uncertain and the future just like the past would be present before its eyes.— Essai philosophique sur les probabilités, Introduction. 1814— Essai philosophique sur les probabilités, Introduction. 1814Essai philosophique sur les probabilitésLaplace thus envisaged a combination of gravitation and mechanics as a theory of everything. Modern quantum mechanics implies that uncertainty is inescapable, and thus that Laplace's vision has to be amended: a theory of everything must include gravitation and quantum mechanics.quantum mechanicsuncertainty is inescapableIn 1820, Hans Christian Ørsted discovered a connection between electricity and magnetism, triggering decades of work that culminated in 1865, in James Clerk Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism. During the 19th and early 20th centuries, it gradually became apparent that many common examples of forces – contact forces, elasticity, viscosity, friction, and pressure – result from electrical interactions between the smallest particles of matter.Hans Christian ØrstedJames Clerk MaxwellelectromagnetismelasticityviscosityfrictionpressureIn his experiments of 1849–50, Michael Faraday was the first to search for a unification of gravity with electricity and magnetism.[13] However, he found no connection.Michael Faradaygravity[13][13]In 1900, David Hilbert published a famous list of mathematical problems. In Hilbert's sixth problem, he challenged researchers to find an axiomatic basis to all of physics. In this problem he thus asked for what today would be called a theory of everything.[14]David HilbertHilbert's sixth problem[14][14]In the late 1920s, the new quantum mechanics showed that the chemical bonds between atoms were examples of (quantum) electrical forces, justifying Dirac's boast that "the underlying physical laws necessary for the mathematical theory of a large part of physics and the whole of chemistry are thus completely known".[15]chemical bondsatomsDirac[15][15]After 1915, when Albert Einstein published the theory of gravity (general relativity), the search for a unified field theory combining gravity with electromagnetism began with a renewed interest. In Einstein's day, the strong and the weak forces had not yet been discovered, yet, he found the potential existence of two other distinct forces -gravity and electromagnetism- far more alluring. This launched his thirty-year voyage in search of the so-called "unified field theory" that he hoped would show that these two forces are really manifestations of one grand underlying principle. During these last few decades of his life, this quixotic quest isolated Einstein from the mainstream of physics. Understandably, the mainstream was instead far more excited about the newly emerging framework of quantum mechanics. Einstein wrote to a friend in the early 1940s, "I have become a lonely old chap who is mainly known because he doesn't wear socks and who is exhibited as a curiosity on special occasions." Prominent contributors were Gunnar Nordström, Hermann Weyl, Arthur Eddington, Theodor Kaluza, Oskar Klein, and most notably, Albert Einstein and his collaborators. Einstein intensely searched for, but ultimately failed to find, a unifying theory.[16]:ch 17 (But see:Einstein–Maxwell–Dirac equations.) More than a half a century later, Einstein's dream of discovering a unified theory has become the Holy Grail of modern physics.Albert Einsteingeneral relativityunified field theoryGunnar NordströmHermann WeylArthur EddingtonTheodor KaluzaOskar Klein[16][16]:ch 17Einstein–Maxwell–Dirac equationsTwentieth century and the nuclear interactions[edit]Twentieth century and the nuclear interactions[edit][edit]In the twentieth century, the search for a unifying theory was interrupted by the discovery of the strong and weak nuclear forces (or interactions), which differ both from gravity and from electromagnetism. A further hurdle was the acceptance that in a ToE, quantum mechanics had to be incorporated from the start, rather than emerging as a consequence of a deterministic unified theory, as Einstein had hoped.strongweakGravity and electromagnetism could always peacefully coexist as entries in a list of classical forces, but for many years it seemed that gravity could not even be incorporated into the quantum framework, let alone unified with the other fundamental forces. For this reason, work on unification, for much of the twentieth century, focused on understanding the three "quantum" forces: electromagnetism and the weak and strong forces. The first two were combined in 1967–68 by Sheldon Glashow, Steven Weinberg, and Abdus Salam into the "electroweak" force.[17] Electroweak unification is a broken symmetry: the electromagnetic and weak forces appear distinct at low energies because the particles carrying the weak force, the W and Z bosons, have non-zero masses of 7001804000000000000♠80.4 GeV/c2 and 7001912000000000000♠91.2 GeV/c2, whereas the photon, which carries the electromagnetic force, is massless. At higher energies Ws and Zs can be created easily and the unified nature of the force becomes apparent.combinedSheldon GlashowSteven WeinbergAbdus Salam[17][17]broken symmetryW and Z bosons7001804000000000000♠80.4 GeV/c27001804000000000000♠c27001912000000000000♠91.2 GeV/c27001912000000000000♠c2photoncreatedWhile the strong and electroweak forces peacefully coexist in the Standard Model of particle physics, they remain distinct. So far, the quest for a theory of everything is thus unsuccessful on two points: neither a unification of the strong and electroweak forces – which Laplace would have called 'contact forces' – has been achieved, nor has a unification of these forces with gravitation been achieved.Standard ModelModern physics[edit]Modern physics[edit][edit]Conventional sequence of theories[edit]Conventional sequence of theories[edit][edit]A Theory of Everything would unify all the fundamental interactions of nature: gravitation, strong interaction, weak interaction, and electromagnetism. Because the weak interaction can transform elementary particles from one kind into another, the ToE should also yield a deep understanding of the various different kinds of possible particles. The usual assumed path of theories is given in the following graph, where each unification step leads one level up:fundamental interactionsgravitationstrong interactionweak interactionelectromagnetismelementary particles


 


 


 


 

Theory of everything

 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 

Quantum gravity

 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

Space Curvature

 


 


 


 

Electronuclear force (GUT)

 




 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 

Standard model of cosmology

 


 


 

Standard model of particle physics






 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 

Strong interaction
SU(3)

 


 


 


 


 

Electroweak interaction
SU(2) x U(1)Y

 




 


 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Weak interaction

 


 


 


 

Electromagnetism
U(1)EM




 


 


 




 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 







 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Electricity

 


 


 


 

Magnetism

 




 


 


 




 


 


 


 

Theory of everything

 


 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  Theory of everything
 
  



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  



 


 


 


 

Quantum gravity

 


 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  Quantum gravityQuantum gravity
 
  



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  



 

Space Curvature

 


 


 


 

Electronuclear force (GUT)

 


 
  Space CurvatureSpace Curvature
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  Electronuclear force (GUT)GUT
 
  

 


 


 


 
  
 
  
 
  

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  



 

Standard model of cosmology

 


 


 

Standard model of particle physics

 
  Standard model of cosmologyStandard model of cosmology
 
  
 
  
 
  Standard model of particle physicsStandard model of particle physics



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  



 


 


 


 

Strong interaction
SU(3)

 


 


 


 


 

Electroweak interaction
SU(2) x U(1)Y

 


 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  Strong interaction
SU(3)Strong interactionSU(3)
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  Electroweak interaction
SU(2) x U(1)YElectroweak interactionSU(2)U(1)YY
 
  

 


 


 


 


 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Weak interaction

 


 


 


 

Electromagnetism
U(1)EM


 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  Weak interactionWeak interaction
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  Electromagnetism
U(1)EMElectromagnetismU(1)EM

 


 


 


 
  
 
  
 
  

 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  



 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 


 

Electricity

 


 


 


 

Magnetism

 


 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  ElectricityElectricity
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  MagnetismMagnetism
 
  

 


 


 


 
  
 
  
 
  In this graph, electroweak unification occurs at around 100 GeV, grand unification is predicted to occur at 1016 GeV, and unification of the GUT force with gravity is expected at the Planck energy, roughly 1019 GeV.16Planck energy19Several Grand Unified Theories (GUTs) have been proposed to unify electromagnetism and the weak and strong forces. Grand unification would imply the existence of an electronuclear force; it is expected to set in at energies of the order of 1016 GeV, far greater than could be reached by any possible Earth-based particle accelerator. Although the simplest GUTs have been experimentally ruled out, the general idea, especially when linked with supersymmetry, remains a favorite candidate in the theoretical physics community. Supersymmetric GUTs seem plausible not only for their theoretical "beauty", but because they naturally produce large quantities of dark matter, and because the inflationary force may be related to GUT physics (although it does not seem to form an inevitable part of the theory). Yet GUTs are clearly not the final answer; both the current standard model and all proposed GUTs are quantum field theories which require the problematic technique of renormalization to yield sensible answers. This is usually regarded as a sign that these are only effective field theories, omitting crucial phenomena relevant only at very high energies.[3]Grand Unified Theories16particle acceleratorsupersymmetryquantum field theoriesrenormalizationeffective field theories[3][3]The final step in the graph requires resolving the separation between quantum mechanics and gravitation, often equated with general relativity. Numerous researchers concentrate their efforts on this specific step; nevertheless, no accepted theory of quantum gravity – and thus no accepted theory of everything – has emerged yet. It is usually assumed that the ToE will also solve the remaining problems of GUTs.general relativityquantum gravityIn addition to explaining the forces listed in the graph, a ToE may also explain the status of at least two candidate forces suggested by modern cosmology: an inflationary force and dark energy. Furthermore, cosmological experiments also suggest the existence of dark matter, supposedly composed of fundamental particles outside the scheme of the standard model. However, the existence of these forces and particles has not been proven yet.cosmologyinflationary forcedark energydark matterString theory and M-theory[edit]String theory and M-theory[edit][edit]


Unsolved problem in physics:
Is string theory, superstring theory, or M-theory, or some other variant on this theme, a step on the road to a "theory of everything", or just a blind alley?
(more unsolved problems in physics)




Unsolved problem in physics:
Is string theory, superstring theory, or M-theory, or some other variant on this theme, a step on the road to a "theory of everything", or just a blind alley?
(more unsolved problems in physics)

Unsolved problem in physics:
Is string theory, superstring theory, or M-theory, or some other variant on this theme, a step on the road to a "theory of everything", or just a blind alley?
(more unsolved problems in physics)
Unsolved problem in physicsIs string theory, superstring theory, or M-theory, or some other variant on this theme, a step on the road to a "theory of everything", or just a blind alley?
(more unsolved problems in physics)Is string theory, superstring theory, or M-theory, or some other variant on this theme, a step on the road to a "theory of everything", or just a blind alley?string theorysuperstring theoryM-theory(more unsolved problems in physics)(more unsolved problems in physics)Since the 1990s, some physicists[who?] believe that 11-dimensional M-theory, which is described in some limits by one of the five perturbative superstring theories, and in another by the maximally-supersymmetric 11-dimensional supergravity, is the theory of everything. However, there is no widespread consensus on this issue.[who?]who?who?who?M-theoryperturbativesuperstring theoriessupersymmetricsupergravityA surprising property of string/M-theory is that extra dimensions are required for the theory's consistency. In this regard, string theory can be seen as building on the insights of the Kaluza–Klein theory, in which it was realized that applying general relativity to a five-dimensional universe (with one of them small and curled up) looks from the four-dimensional perspective like the usual general relativity together with Maxwell's electrodynamics. This lent credence to the idea of unifying gauge and gravity interactions, and to extra dimensions, but did not address the detailed experimental requirements. Another important property of string theory is its supersymmetry, which together with extra dimensions are the two main proposals for resolving the hierarchy problem of the standard model, which is (roughly) the question of why gravity is so much weaker than any other force. The extra-dimensional solution involves allowing gravity to propagate into the other dimensions while keeping other forces confined to a four-dimensional spacetime, an idea that has been realized with explicit stringy mechanisms.[18]stringM-theoryKaluza–Klein theoryMaxwell's electrodynamicsgaugegravitysupersymmetryhierarchy problemstandard model[18][18]Research into string theory has been encouraged by a variety of theoretical and experimental factors. On the experimental side, the particle content of the standard model supplemented with neutrino masses fits into a spinor representation of SO(10), a subgroup of E8 that routinely emerges in string theory, such as in heterotic string theory[19] or (sometimes equivalently) in F-theory.[20][21] String theory has mechanisms that may explain why fermions come in three hierarchical generations, and explain the mixing rates between quark generations.[22] On the theoretical side, it has begun to address some of the key questions in quantum gravity, such as resolving the black hole information paradox, counting the correct entropy of black holes[23][24] and allowing for topology-changing processes.[25][26][27] It has also led to many insights in pure mathematics and in ordinary, strongly-coupled gauge theory due to the Gauge/String duality.neutrino massesSO(10)E8heterotic string theory[19][19]F-theory[20][20][21][21]mixing rates[22][22]quantum gravityblack hole information paradoxentropy of black holes[23][23][24][24]topology[25][25][26][26][27][27]pure mathematicsgauge theoryGauge/String dualityIn the late 1990s, it was noted that one major hurdle in this endeavor is that the number of possible four-dimensional universes is incredibly large. The small, "curled up" extra dimensions can be compactified in an enormous number of different ways (one estimate is 10500 ) each of which leads to different properties for the low-energy particles and forces. This array of models is known as the string theory landscape.[8]:347compactified500string theory landscape[8][8]:347One proposed solution is that many or all of these possibilities are realised in one or another of a huge number of universes, but that only a small number of them are habitable, and hence the fundamental constants of the universe are ultimately the result of the anthropic principle rather than dictated by theory. This has led to criticism of string theory,[28] arguing that it cannot make useful (i.e., original, falsifiable, and verifiable) predictions and regarding it as a pseudoscience. Others disagree,[29] and string theory remains an extremely active topic of investigation in theoretical physics.[citation needed]anthropic principle[28][28]pseudoscience[29][29]theoretical physics[citation needed]citation neededcitation neededcitation neededLoop quantum gravity[edit]Loop quantum gravity[edit][edit]Current research on loop quantum gravity may eventually play a fundamental role in a ToE, but that is not its primary aim.[30] Also loop quantum gravity introduces a lower bound on the possible length scales.loop quantum gravity[30][30]There have been recent claims that loop quantum gravity may be able to reproduce features resembling the Standard Model. So far only the first generation of fermions (leptons and quarks) with correct parity properties have been modelled by Sundance Bilson-Thompson using preons constituted of braids of spacetime as the building blocks.[31] However, there is no derivation of the Lagrangian that would describe the interactions of such particles, nor is it possible to show that such particles are fermions, nor that the gauge groups or interactions of the Standard Model are realised. Utilization of quantum computing concepts made it possible to demonstrate that the particles are able to survive quantum fluctuations.[32]Standard ModelfermionsleptonsquarksSundance Bilson-Thompsonpreons[31][31]Lagrangianquantum computingquantum fluctuations[32][32]This model leads to an interpretation of electric and colour charge as topological quantities (electric as number and chirality of twists carried on the individual ribbons and colour as variants of such twisting for fixed electric charge).Bilson-Thompson's original paper suggested that the higher-generation fermions could be represented by more complicated braidings, although explicit constructions of these structures were not given. The electric charge, colour, and parity properties of such fermions would arise in the same way as for the first generation. The model was expressly generalized for an infinite number of generations and for the weak force bosons (but not for photons or gluons) in a 2008 paper by Bilson-Thompson, Hackett, Kauffman and Smolin.[33][33][33]Other attempts[edit]Other attempts[edit][edit]A recent development is the theory of causal fermion systems,[34] giving all three current physical theories (quantum mechanics, general relativity and quantum field theory) as limiting cases.causal fermion systems[34][34]quantum mechanicsgeneral relativityquantum field theoryA recent and very prolific attempt is called Causal Sets. As some of the approaches mentioned above, its direct goal isn't necessarily to achieve a ToE but primarily a working theory of quantum gravity, which might eventually include the standard model and become a candidate for a ToE. Its founding principle is that spacetime is fundamentally discrete and that the spacetime events are related by a partial order. This partial order has the physical meaning of the causality relations between relative past and future distinguishing spacetime events.Causal Setspartial ordercausality relationspast and future distinguishingOutside the previously mentioned attempts there is Garrett Lisi's E8 proposal. This theory provides an attempt of identifying general relativity and the standard model within the Lie group E8. The theory doesn't provide a novel quantization procedure and the author suggests its quantization might follow the Loop Quantum Gravity approach above mentioned.[35]Garrett Lisi's E8 proposal[35][35]Christoph Schiller's Strand Model attempts to account for the gauge symmetry of the Standard Model of particle physics, U(1)×SU(2)×SU(3), with the three Reidemeister moves of knot theory by equating each elementary particle to a different tangle of one, two, or three strands (selectively a long prime knot or unknotted curve, a rational tangle, or a braided tangle respectively).gauge symmetryStandard ModelU(1)SU(2)SU(3)Reidemeister moveselementary particlerational tanglebraidedPresent status[edit]Present status[edit][edit]At present, there is no candidate theory of everything that includes the standard model of particle physics and general relativity. For example, no candidate theory is able to calculate the fine structure constant or the mass of the electron. Most particle physicists expect that the outcome of the ongoing experiments – the search for new particles at the large particle accelerators and for dark matter – are needed in order to provide further input for a ToE.particle acceleratorsdark matterTheory of everything and philosophy[edit]Theory of everything and philosophy[edit][edit]Main article: Theory of everything (philosophy)Theory of everything (philosophy)The philosophical implications of a physical ToE are frequently debated. For example, if philosophical physicalism is true, a physical ToE will coincide with a philosophical theory of everything.physicalismThe "system building" style of metaphysics attempts to answer all the important questions in a coherent way, providing a complete picture of the world. Plato and Aristotle could be said to have created early examples of comprehensive systems. In the early modern period (17th and 18th centuries), the system-building scope of philosophy is often linked to the rationalist method of philosophy, which is the technique of deducing the nature of the world by pure a priori reason. Examples from the early modern period include the Leibniz's Monadology, Descarte's Dualism, and Spinoza's Monism. Hegel's Absolute idealism and Whitehead's Process philosophy were later systems."system building"metaphysicsallPlatoAristotlescopemethoda prioria prioriLeibnizMonadologyDescarteDualismSpinozaMonismHegelAbsolute idealismWhiteheadProcess philosophyArguments against a theory of everything[edit]Arguments against a theory of everything[edit][edit]In parallel to the intense search for a ToE, various scholars have seriously debated the possibility of its discovery.Gödel's incompleteness theorem[edit]Gödel's incompleteness theorem[edit][edit]A number of scholars claim that Gödel's incompleteness theorem suggests that any attempt to construct a ToE is bound to fail. Gödel's theorem, informally stated, asserts that any formal theory expressive enough for elementary arithmetical facts to be expressed and strong enough for them to be proved is either inconsistent (both a statement and its denial can be derived from its axioms) or incomplete, in the sense that there is a true statement that can't be derived in the formal theory.Gödel's incompleteness theoremStanley Jaki, in his 1966 book The Relevance of Physics, pointed out that, because any "theory of everything" will certainly be a consistent non-trivial mathematical theory, it must be incomplete. He claims that this dooms searches for a deterministic theory of everything.[36] In a later reflection, Jaki states that it is wrong to say that a final theory is impossible, but rather that "when it is on hand one cannot know rigorously that it is a final theory."[37]Stanley JakiThe Relevance of Physics[36][36][37][37]Freeman Dyson has stated that "Gödel's theorem implies that pure mathematics is inexhaustible. No matter how many problems we solve, there will always be other problems that cannot be solved within the existing rules. […] Because of Gödel's theorem, physics is inexhaustible too. The laws of physics are a finite set of rules, and include the rules for doing mathematics, so that Gödel's theorem applies to them."[38]Freeman Dyson[38][38]Stephen Hawking was originally a believer in the Theory of Everything but, after considering Gödel's Theorem, concluded that one was not obtainable: "Some people will be very disappointed if there is not an ultimate theory, that can be formulated as a finite number of principles. I used to belong to that camp, but I have changed my mind."[39]Stephen Hawking[39][39]Jürgen Schmidhuber (1997) has argued against this view; he points out that Gödel's theorems are irrelevant for computable physics.[40] In 2000, Schmidhuber explicitly constructed limit-computable, deterministic universes whose pseudo-randomness based on undecidable, Gödel-like halting problems is extremely hard to detect but does not at all prevent formal ToEs describable by very few bits of information.[41]Jürgen Schmidhubercomputable[40][40]pseudo-randomnessundecidablehalting problems[41][41]Related critique was offered by Solomon Feferman,[42] among others. Douglas S. Robertson offers Conway's game of life as an example:[43] The underlying rules are simple and complete, but there are formally undecidable questions about the game's behaviors. Analogously, it may (or may not) be possible to completely state the underlying rules of physics with a finite number of well-defined laws, but there is little doubt that there are questions about the behavior of physical systems which are formally undecidable on the basis of those underlying laws.Solomon Feferman[42][42]Conway's game of life[43][43]Since most physicists would consider the statement of the underlying rules to suffice as the definition of a "theory of everything", most physicists argue that Gödel's Theorem does not mean that a ToE cannot exist. On the other hand, the scholars invoking Gödel's Theorem appear, at least in some cases, to be referring not to the underlying rules, but to the understandability of the behavior of all physical systems, as when Hawking mentions arranging blocks into rectangles, turning the computation of prime numbers into a physical question.[44] This definitional discrepancy may explain some of the disagreement among researchers.notprime numbers[44][44]Fundamental limits in accuracy[edit]Fundamental limits in accuracy[edit][edit]No physical theory to date is believed to be precisely accurate. Instead, physics has proceeded by a series of "successive approximations" allowing more and more accurate predictions over a wider and wider range of phenomena. Some physicists believe that it is therefore a mistake to confuse theoretical models with the true nature of reality, and hold that the series of approximations will never terminate in the "truth". Einstein himself expressed this view on occasions.[45] Following this view, we may reasonably hope for a theory of everything which self-consistently incorporates all currently known forces, but we should not expect it to be the final answer.[45][45]aOn the other hand, it is often claimed that, despite the apparently ever-increasing complexity of the mathematics of each new theory, in a deep sense associated with their underlying gauge symmetry and the number of fundamental physical constants, the theories are becoming simpler. If this is the case, the process of simplification cannot continue indefinitely.gauge symmetryfundamental physical constantsLack of fundamental laws[edit]Lack of fundamental laws[edit][edit]There is a philosophical debate within the physics community as to whether a theory of everything deserves to be called the fundamental law of the universe.[46] One view is the hard reductionist position that the ToE is the fundamental law and that all other theories that apply within the universe are a consequence of the ToE. Another view is that emergent laws, which govern the behavior of complex systems, should be seen as equally fundamental. Examples of emergent laws are the second law of thermodynamics and the theory of natural selection. The advocates of emergence argue that emergent laws, especially those describing complex or living systems are independent of the low-level, microscopic laws. In this view, emergent laws are as fundamental as a ToE.the[46][46]reductionistemergentcomplex systemssecond law of thermodynamicsnatural selectionThe debates do not make the point at issue clear. Possibly the only issue at stake is the right to apply the high-status term "fundamental" to the respective subjects of research. A well-known one took place between Steven Weinberg and Philip Anderson[citation needed]Philip Anderson[citation needed]citation neededcitation neededcitation neededImpossibility of being "of everything"[edit]Impossibility of being "of everything"[edit][edit]Although the name "theory of everything" suggests the determinism of Laplace's quotation, this gives a very misleading impression. Determinism is frustrated by the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanical predictions, by the extreme sensitivity to initial conditions that leads to mathematical chaos, by the limitations due to event horizons, and by the extreme mathematical difficulty of applying the theory. Thus, although the current standard model of particle physics "in principle" predicts almost all known non-gravitational phenomena, in practice only a few quantitative results have been derived from the full theory (e.g., the masses of some of the simplest hadrons), and these results (especially the particle masses which are most relevant for low-energy physics) are less accurate than existing experimental measurements. The ToE would almost certainly be even harder to apply for the prediction of experimental results, and thus might be of limited use.mathematical chaoshadronsA motive for seeking a ToE,[citation needed] apart from the pure intellectual satisfaction of completing a centuries-long quest, is that prior examples of unification have predicted new phenomena, some of which (e.g., electrical generators) have proved of great practical importance. And like in these prior examples of unification, the ToE would probably allow us to confidently define the domain of validity and residual error of low-energy approximations to the full theory.[citation needed]citation neededcitation neededcitation neededelectrical generatorsInfinite number of onion layers[edit]Infinite number of onion layers[edit][edit]Lee Smolin regularly argues that the layers of nature may be like the layers of an onion, and that the number of layers might be infinite.[citation needed] This would imply an infinite sequence of physical theories.Lee Smolin[citation needed]citation neededcitation neededcitation neededThe argument is not universally accepted, because it is not obvious that infinity is a concept that applies to the foundations of nature.Impossibility of calculation[edit]Impossibility of calculation[edit][edit]Weinberg[47] points out that calculating the precise motion of an actual projectile in the Earth's atmosphere is impossible. So how can we know we have an adequate theory for describing the motion of projectiles? Weinberg suggests that we know principles (Newton's laws of motion and gravitation) that work "well enough" for simple examples, like the motion of planets in empty space. These principles have worked so well on simple examples that we can be reasonably confident they will work for more complex examples. For example, although general relativity includes equations that do not have exact solutions, it is widely accepted as a valid theory because all of its equations with exact solutions have been experimentally verified. Likewise, a ToE must work for a wide range of simple examples in such a way that we can be reasonably confident it will work for every situation in physics.[47][47]principlesgeneral relativitySee also[edit]See also[edit][edit]



Physics portal





Physics portal



Physics portal
Physics portalPhysics portal

Absolute (philosophy)
An Exceptionally Simple Theory of Everything
Argument from beauty
Attractor
Beyond black holes
Beyond the standard model
Big Bang
Brownian motion
Chaos theory
Chronology of the universe
Electroweak interaction
Holographic principle
Mathematical beauty
Mathematical universe hypothesis
Multiverse
Standard Model (mathematical formulation)
Superfluid vacuum theory (SVT)
The Theory of Everything (2014 film) – a feature film about Prof. Stephen Hawking and his first wife Jane Hawking
Timeline of the Big Bang
Zero-energy universe


Absolute (philosophy)
An Exceptionally Simple Theory of Everything
Argument from beauty
Attractor
Beyond black holes
Beyond the standard model
Big Bang
Brownian motion
Chaos theory
Chronology of the universe
Electroweak interaction
Holographic principle
Mathematical beauty
Mathematical universe hypothesis
Multiverse
Standard Model (mathematical formulation)
Superfluid vacuum theory (SVT)
The Theory of Everything (2014 film) – a feature film about Prof. Stephen Hawking and his first wife Jane Hawking
Timeline of the Big Bang
Zero-energy universe
Absolute (philosophy)Absolute (philosophy)An Exceptionally Simple Theory of EverythingAn Exceptionally Simple Theory of EverythingArgument from beautyArgument from beautyAttractorAttractorBeyond black holesBeyond black holesBeyond the standard modelBeyond the standard modelBig BangBig BangBrownian motionBrownian motionChaos theoryChaos theoryChronology of the universeChronology of the universeElectroweak interactionElectroweak interactionHolographic principleHolographic principleMathematical beautyMathematical beautyMathematical universe hypothesisMathematical universe hypothesisMultiverseMultiverseStandard Model (mathematical formulation)Standard Model (mathematical formulation)Superfluid vacuum theory (SVT)Superfluid vacuum theoryThe Theory of Everything (2014 film) – a feature film about Prof. Stephen Hawking and his first wife Jane HawkingThe Theory of Everything (2014 film)The Theory of Everything (2014 film)Jane HawkingTimeline of the Big BangTimeline of the Big BangZero-energy universeZero-energy universeReferences[edit]References[edit][edit]Footnotes[edit]Footnotes[edit][edit]

^ Steven Weinberg. Dreams of a Final Theory: The Scientist's Search for the Ultimate Laws of Nature. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-307-78786-6. 
^ Stephen W. Hawking (28 February 2006). The Theory of Everything: The Origin and Fate of the Universe. Phoenix Books; Special Anniv. ISBN 978-1-59777-508-3. 
^ a b Carlip, Steven (2001). "Quantum Gravity: a Progress Report". Reports on Progress in Physics 64 (8): 885. arXiv:gr-qc/0108040. Bibcode:2001RPPh...64..885C. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/64/8/301. 
^ Susanna Hornig Priest (14 July 2010). Encyclopedia of Science and Technology Communication. SAGE Publications. ISBN 978-1-4522-6578-0. 
^ Ellis, John (2002). "Physics gets physical (correspondence)". Nature 415 (6875): 957. Bibcode:2002Natur.415..957E. doi:10.1038/415957b. 
^ Ellis, John (1986). "The Superstring: Theory of Everything, or of Nothing?". Nature 323 (6089): 595–598. Bibcode:1986Natur.323..595E. doi:10.1038/323595a0. 
^ Rorres, Chris (2009). "ARCHIMEDES AND THE QUEST FOR THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING". 
^ a b Chris Impey (26 March 2012). How It Began: A Time-Traveler's Guide to the Universe. W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-08002-5. 
^ William E. Burns (1 January 2001). The Scientific Revolution: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-87436-875-8. 
^ Shapin, Steven (1996). The Scientific Revolution. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-75021-3. 
^ Newton, Sir Isaac (1729). The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy II. p. 255. 
^ Sean Carroll (7 January 2010). From Eternity to Here: The Quest for the Ultimate Theory of Time. Penguin Group US. ISBN 978-1-101-15215-7. 
^ Faraday, M. (1850). "Experimental Researches in Electricity. Twenty-Fourth Series. On the Possible Relation of Gravity to Electricity". Abstracts of the Papers Communicated to the Royal Society of London 5: 994–995. doi:10.1098/rspl.1843.0267. 
^ Gorban, Alexander N.; Karlin, Ilya (2013). "Hilbert's 6th Problem: Exact and approximate hydrodynamic manifolds for kinetic equations". Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 51 (2): 187. doi:10.1090/S0273-0979-2013-01439-3. 
^ Dirac, P.A.M. (1929). "Quantum mechanics of many-electron systems". Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A 123 (792): 714. Bibcode:1929RSPSA.123..714D. doi:10.1098/rspa.1929.0094. 
^ Abraham Pais (23 September 1982). Subtle is the Lord : The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-152402-8. 
^ Weinberg (1993), Ch. 5
^ Holloway, M (2005). "The Beauty of Branes" (PDF). Scientific American (Scientific American) 293 (4): 38. Bibcode:2005SciAm.293d..38H. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1005-38. PMID 16196251. Retrieved August 13, 2012. 
^ Nilles, Hans Peter; Ramos-Sánchez, Saúl; Ratz, Michael; Vaudrevange, Patrick K. S. (2008). "From strings to the MSSM". The European Physical Journal C 59 (2): 249. arXiv:0806.3905. Bibcode:2009EPJC...59..249N. doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-008-0740-1. 
^ Beasley, Chris; Heckman, Jonathan J; Vafa, Cumrun (2009). "GUTs and exceptional branes in F-theory — I". Journal of High Energy Physics 2009: 058. arXiv:0802.3391. Bibcode:2009JHEP...01..058B. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2009/01/058. 
^ Donagi, Ron; Wijnholt, Martijn (2008). "Model Building with F-Theory". arXiv:0802.2969v3 [hep-th]. 
^ Heckman, Jonathan J.; Vafa, Cumrun (2008). "Flavor Hierarchy from F-theory". Nuclear Physics B 837: 137–151. arXiv:0811.2417v3. doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2010.05.009. 
^ Strominger, Andrew; Vafa, Cumrun (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379: 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0. 
^ Horowitz, Gary (1996). "Gravitational Wave Astronomy". The Origin of Black Hole Entropy in String Theory. Astrophysics and Space Science Library 211. p. 95. arXiv:gr-qc/9604051. doi:10.1007/978-94-011-5812-1_7. ISBN 978-94-010-6455-2. 
^ Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R.; Strominger, Andrew (1995). "Black hole condensation and the unification of string vacua". Nuclear Physics B 451: 109. arXiv:hep-th/9504145. Bibcode:1995NuPhB.451..109G. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(95)00371-X. 
^ Aspinwall, Paul S.; Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R. (1994). "Calabi-Yau moduli space, mirror manifolds and spacetime topology change in string theory". Nuclear Physics B 416 (2): 414. arXiv:hep-th/9309097. Bibcode:1994NuPhB.416..414A. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(94)90321-2. 
^ Adams, Allan; Liu, Xiao; McGreevy, John; Saltman, Alex; Silverstein, Eva (2005). "Things fall apart: Topology change from winding tachyons". Journal of High Energy Physics 2005 (10): 033. arXiv:hep-th/0502021. Bibcode:2005JHEP...10..033A. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2005/10/033. 
^ Smolin, Lee (2006). The Trouble With Physics: The Rise of String Theory, the Fall of a Science, and What Comes Next. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-55105-7. 
^ Duff, M. J. (2011). "String and M-Theory: Answering the Critics". Foundations of Physics 43: 182. arXiv:1112.0788. Bibcode:2013FoPh...43..182D. doi:10.1007/s10701-011-9618-4. 
^ Potter, Franklin (15 February 2005). "Leptons And Quarks In A Discrete Spacetime" (PDF). Frank Potter's Science Gems. Retrieved 2009-12-01. 
^ Bilson-Thompson, Sundance O.; Markopoulou, Fotini; Smolin, Lee (2007). "Quantum gravity and the standard model". Classical and Quantum Gravity 24 (16): 3975–3994. arXiv:hep-th/0603022. Bibcode:2007CQGra..24.3975B. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/24/16/002. 
^ Castelvecchi, Davide; Valerie Jamieson (August 12, 2006). "You are made of space-time". New Scientist (2564). 
^ Sundance Bilson-Thompson; Jonathan Hackett; Lou Kauffman; Lee Smolin (2008). "Particle Identifications from Symmetries of Braided Ribbon Network Invariants". arXiv:0804.0037 [hep-th]. 
^ F. Finster; J. Kleiner (2015). "Causal fermion systems as a candidate for a unified physical theory". Journal of Physics: Conference Series 626 (2015): 012020. arXiv:1502.03587. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/626/1/012020. 
^ A. G. Lisi (2007). "An Exceptionally Simple Theory of Everything". arXiv:0711.0770 [hep-th]. 
^ Jaki, S.L. (1966). The Relevance of Physics. Chicago Press. pp. 127–130. 
^ Stanley L. Jaki (2004) "A Late Awakening to Gödel in Physics", pp. 8–9.
^ Freeman Dyson, NYRB, May 13, 2004
^ Stephen Hawking, Gödel and the end of physics, July 20, 2002
^ Schmidhuber, Jürgen (1997). A Computer Scientist's View of Life, the Universe, and Everything. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer. pp. 201–208. doi:10.1007/BFb0052071. ISBN 978-3-540-63746-2. 
^ Schmidhuber, Jürgen (2002). "Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit". Sections in: Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science ():587-612 (2002). Section 6 in: the Speed Prior: A New Simplicity Measure Yielding Near-Optimal Computable Predictions. in J. Kivinen and R. H. Sloan, editors, Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT 2002), Sydney, Australia, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 216--228. Springer, 2002 13 (4): 1–5. arXiv:quant-ph/0011122. 
^ Feferman, Solomon (17 November 2006). "The nature and significance of Gödel’s incompleteness theorems" (PDF). Institute for Advanced Study. Retrieved 2009-01-12. 
^ Robertson, Douglas S. (2007). "Goedel's Theorem, the Theory of Everything, and the Future of Science and Mathematics". Complexity 5 (5): 22–27. doi:10.1002/1099-0526(200005/06)5:5<22::AID-CPLX4>3.0.CO;2-0. 
^ Hawking, Stephen (20 July 2002). "Gödel and the end of physics". Retrieved 2009-12-01. 
^ Einstein, letter to Felix Klein, 1917. (On determinism and approximations.) Quoted in Pais (1982), Ch. 17.
^ Weinberg (1993), Ch 2.
^ Weinberg (1993) p. 5


^ Steven Weinberg. Dreams of a Final Theory: The Scientist's Search for the Ultimate Laws of Nature. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-307-78786-6. 
^ Stephen W. Hawking (28 February 2006). The Theory of Everything: The Origin and Fate of the Universe. Phoenix Books; Special Anniv. ISBN 978-1-59777-508-3. 
^ a b Carlip, Steven (2001). "Quantum Gravity: a Progress Report". Reports on Progress in Physics 64 (8): 885. arXiv:gr-qc/0108040. Bibcode:2001RPPh...64..885C. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/64/8/301. 
^ Susanna Hornig Priest (14 July 2010). Encyclopedia of Science and Technology Communication. SAGE Publications. ISBN 978-1-4522-6578-0. 
^ Ellis, John (2002). "Physics gets physical (correspondence)". Nature 415 (6875): 957. Bibcode:2002Natur.415..957E. doi:10.1038/415957b. 
^ Ellis, John (1986). "The Superstring: Theory of Everything, or of Nothing?". Nature 323 (6089): 595–598. Bibcode:1986Natur.323..595E. doi:10.1038/323595a0. 
^ Rorres, Chris (2009). "ARCHIMEDES AND THE QUEST FOR THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING". 
^ a b Chris Impey (26 March 2012). How It Began: A Time-Traveler's Guide to the Universe. W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-08002-5. 
^ William E. Burns (1 January 2001). The Scientific Revolution: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-87436-875-8. 
^ Shapin, Steven (1996). The Scientific Revolution. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-75021-3. 
^ Newton, Sir Isaac (1729). The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy II. p. 255. 
^ Sean Carroll (7 January 2010). From Eternity to Here: The Quest for the Ultimate Theory of Time. Penguin Group US. ISBN 978-1-101-15215-7. 
^ Faraday, M. (1850). "Experimental Researches in Electricity. Twenty-Fourth Series. On the Possible Relation of Gravity to Electricity". Abstracts of the Papers Communicated to the Royal Society of London 5: 994–995. doi:10.1098/rspl.1843.0267. 
^ Gorban, Alexander N.; Karlin, Ilya (2013). "Hilbert's 6th Problem: Exact and approximate hydrodynamic manifolds for kinetic equations". Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 51 (2): 187. doi:10.1090/S0273-0979-2013-01439-3. 
^ Dirac, P.A.M. (1929). "Quantum mechanics of many-electron systems". Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A 123 (792): 714. Bibcode:1929RSPSA.123..714D. doi:10.1098/rspa.1929.0094. 
^ Abraham Pais (23 September 1982). Subtle is the Lord : The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-152402-8. 
^ Weinberg (1993), Ch. 5
^ Holloway, M (2005). "The Beauty of Branes" (PDF). Scientific American (Scientific American) 293 (4): 38. Bibcode:2005SciAm.293d..38H. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1005-38. PMID 16196251. Retrieved August 13, 2012. 
^ Nilles, Hans Peter; Ramos-Sánchez, Saúl; Ratz, Michael; Vaudrevange, Patrick K. S. (2008). "From strings to the MSSM". The European Physical Journal C 59 (2): 249. arXiv:0806.3905. Bibcode:2009EPJC...59..249N. doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-008-0740-1. 
^ Beasley, Chris; Heckman, Jonathan J; Vafa, Cumrun (2009). "GUTs and exceptional branes in F-theory — I". Journal of High Energy Physics 2009: 058. arXiv:0802.3391. Bibcode:2009JHEP...01..058B. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2009/01/058. 
^ Donagi, Ron; Wijnholt, Martijn (2008). "Model Building with F-Theory". arXiv:0802.2969v3 [hep-th]. 
^ Heckman, Jonathan J.; Vafa, Cumrun (2008). "Flavor Hierarchy from F-theory". Nuclear Physics B 837: 137–151. arXiv:0811.2417v3. doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2010.05.009. 
^ Strominger, Andrew; Vafa, Cumrun (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379: 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0. 
^ Horowitz, Gary (1996). "Gravitational Wave Astronomy". The Origin of Black Hole Entropy in String Theory. Astrophysics and Space Science Library 211. p. 95. arXiv:gr-qc/9604051. doi:10.1007/978-94-011-5812-1_7. ISBN 978-94-010-6455-2. 
^ Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R.; Strominger, Andrew (1995). "Black hole condensation and the unification of string vacua". Nuclear Physics B 451: 109. arXiv:hep-th/9504145. Bibcode:1995NuPhB.451..109G. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(95)00371-X. 
^ Aspinwall, Paul S.; Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R. (1994). "Calabi-Yau moduli space, mirror manifolds and spacetime topology change in string theory". Nuclear Physics B 416 (2): 414. arXiv:hep-th/9309097. Bibcode:1994NuPhB.416..414A. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(94)90321-2. 
^ Adams, Allan; Liu, Xiao; McGreevy, John; Saltman, Alex; Silverstein, Eva (2005). "Things fall apart: Topology change from winding tachyons". Journal of High Energy Physics 2005 (10): 033. arXiv:hep-th/0502021. Bibcode:2005JHEP...10..033A. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2005/10/033. 
^ Smolin, Lee (2006). The Trouble With Physics: The Rise of String Theory, the Fall of a Science, and What Comes Next. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-55105-7. 
^ Duff, M. J. (2011). "String and M-Theory: Answering the Critics". Foundations of Physics 43: 182. arXiv:1112.0788. Bibcode:2013FoPh...43..182D. doi:10.1007/s10701-011-9618-4. 
^ Potter, Franklin (15 February 2005). "Leptons And Quarks In A Discrete Spacetime" (PDF). Frank Potter's Science Gems. Retrieved 2009-12-01. 
^ Bilson-Thompson, Sundance O.; Markopoulou, Fotini; Smolin, Lee (2007). "Quantum gravity and the standard model". Classical and Quantum Gravity 24 (16): 3975–3994. arXiv:hep-th/0603022. Bibcode:2007CQGra..24.3975B. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/24/16/002. 
^ Castelvecchi, Davide; Valerie Jamieson (August 12, 2006). "You are made of space-time". New Scientist (2564). 
^ Sundance Bilson-Thompson; Jonathan Hackett; Lou Kauffman; Lee Smolin (2008). "Particle Identifications from Symmetries of Braided Ribbon Network Invariants". arXiv:0804.0037 [hep-th]. 
^ F. Finster; J. Kleiner (2015). "Causal fermion systems as a candidate for a unified physical theory". Journal of Physics: Conference Series 626 (2015): 012020. arXiv:1502.03587. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/626/1/012020. 
^ A. G. Lisi (2007). "An Exceptionally Simple Theory of Everything". arXiv:0711.0770 [hep-th]. 
^ Jaki, S.L. (1966). The Relevance of Physics. Chicago Press. pp. 127–130. 
^ Stanley L. Jaki (2004) "A Late Awakening to Gödel in Physics", pp. 8–9.
^ Freeman Dyson, NYRB, May 13, 2004
^ Stephen Hawking, Gödel and the end of physics, July 20, 2002
^ Schmidhuber, Jürgen (1997). A Computer Scientist's View of Life, the Universe, and Everything. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer. pp. 201–208. doi:10.1007/BFb0052071. ISBN 978-3-540-63746-2. 
^ Schmidhuber, Jürgen (2002). "Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit". Sections in: Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science ():587-612 (2002). Section 6 in: the Speed Prior: A New Simplicity Measure Yielding Near-Optimal Computable Predictions. in J. Kivinen and R. H. Sloan, editors, Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT 2002), Sydney, Australia, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 216--228. Springer, 2002 13 (4): 1–5. arXiv:quant-ph/0011122. 
^ Feferman, Solomon (17 November 2006). "The nature and significance of Gödel’s incompleteness theorems" (PDF). Institute for Advanced Study. Retrieved 2009-01-12. 
^ Robertson, Douglas S. (2007). "Goedel's Theorem, the Theory of Everything, and the Future of Science and Mathematics". Complexity 5 (5): 22–27. doi:10.1002/1099-0526(200005/06)5:5<22::AID-CPLX4>3.0.CO;2-0. 
^ Hawking, Stephen (20 July 2002). "Gödel and the end of physics". Retrieved 2009-12-01. 
^ Einstein, letter to Felix Klein, 1917. (On determinism and approximations.) Quoted in Pais (1982), Ch. 17.
^ Weinberg (1993), Ch 2.
^ Weinberg (1993) p. 5
^ Steven Weinberg. Dreams of a Final Theory: The Scientist's Search for the Ultimate Laws of Nature. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-307-78786-6. ^^^Steven Weinberg. Dreams of a Final Theory: The Scientist's Search for the Ultimate Laws of Nature. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-307-78786-6. Steven Weinberg. Dreams of a Final Theory: The Scientist's Search for the Ultimate Laws of Nature. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-307-78786-6.Dreams of a Final Theory: The Scientist's Search for the Ultimate Laws of NatureISBN978-0-307-78786-6  ^ Stephen W. Hawking (28 February 2006). The Theory of Everything: The Origin and Fate of the Universe. Phoenix Books; Special Anniv. ISBN 978-1-59777-508-3. ^^^Stephen W. Hawking (28 February 2006). The Theory of Everything: The Origin and Fate of the Universe. Phoenix Books; Special Anniv. ISBN 978-1-59777-508-3. Stephen W. Hawking (28 February 2006). The Theory of Everything: The Origin and Fate of the Universe. Phoenix Books; Special Anniv. ISBN 978-1-59777-508-3.The Theory of Everything: The Origin and Fate of the UniverseISBN978-1-59777-508-3  ^ a b Carlip, Steven (2001). "Quantum Gravity: a Progress Report". Reports on Progress in Physics 64 (8): 885. arXiv:gr-qc/0108040. Bibcode:2001RPPh...64..885C. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/64/8/301. ^ a baaaabbbbCarlip, Steven (2001). "Quantum Gravity: a Progress Report". Reports on Progress in Physics 64 (8): 885. arXiv:gr-qc/0108040. Bibcode:2001RPPh...64..885C. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/64/8/301. Carlip, Steven (2001). "Quantum Gravity: a Progress Report". Reports on Progress in Physics 64 (8): 885. arXiv:gr-qc/0108040. Bibcode:2001RPPh...64..885C. doi:10.1088/0034-4885/64/8/301."Quantum Gravity: a Progress Report"Reports on Progress in Physics64arXivgr-qc/0108040Bibcode2001RPPh...64..885Cdoi10.1088/0034-4885/64/8/301  ^ Susanna Hornig Priest (14 July 2010). Encyclopedia of Science and Technology Communication. SAGE Publications. ISBN 978-1-4522-6578-0. ^^^Susanna Hornig Priest (14 July 2010). Encyclopedia of Science and Technology Communication. SAGE Publications. ISBN 978-1-4522-6578-0. Susanna Hornig Priest (14 July 2010). Encyclopedia of Science and Technology Communication. SAGE Publications. ISBN 978-1-4522-6578-0.Encyclopedia of Science and Technology CommunicationISBN978-1-4522-6578-0  ^ Ellis, John (2002). "Physics gets physical (correspondence)". Nature 415 (6875): 957. Bibcode:2002Natur.415..957E. doi:10.1038/415957b. ^^^Ellis, John (2002). "Physics gets physical (correspondence)". Nature 415 (6875): 957. Bibcode:2002Natur.415..957E. doi:10.1038/415957b. Ellis, John (2002). "Physics gets physical (correspondence)". Nature 415 (6875): 957. Bibcode:2002Natur.415..957E. doi:10.1038/415957b.NatureNature415Bibcode2002Natur.415..957Edoi10.1038/415957b  ^ Ellis, John (1986). "The Superstring: Theory of Everything, or of Nothing?". Nature 323 (6089): 595–598. Bibcode:1986Natur.323..595E. doi:10.1038/323595a0. ^^^Ellis, John (1986). "The Superstring: Theory of Everything, or of Nothing?". Nature 323 (6089): 595–598. Bibcode:1986Natur.323..595E. doi:10.1038/323595a0. Ellis, John (1986). "The Superstring: Theory of Everything, or of Nothing?". Nature 323 (6089): 595–598. Bibcode:1986Natur.323..595E. doi:10.1038/323595a0.Nature323Bibcode1986Natur.323..595Edoi10.1038/323595a0  ^ Rorres, Chris (2009). "ARCHIMEDES AND THE QUEST FOR THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING". ^^^Rorres, Chris (2009). "ARCHIMEDES AND THE QUEST FOR THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING". Rorres, Chris (2009). "ARCHIMEDES AND THE QUEST FOR THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING"."ARCHIMEDES AND THE QUEST FOR THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING"  ^ a b Chris Impey (26 March 2012). How It Began: A Time-Traveler's Guide to the Universe. W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-08002-5. ^ a baaaabbbbChris Impey (26 March 2012). How It Began: A Time-Traveler's Guide to the Universe. W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-08002-5. Chris Impey (26 March 2012). How It Began: A Time-Traveler's Guide to the Universe. W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-08002-5.How It Began: A Time-Traveler's Guide to the UniverseHow It Began: A Time-Traveler's Guide to the UniverseISBN978-0-393-08002-5  ^ William E. Burns (1 January 2001). The Scientific Revolution: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-87436-875-8. ^^^William E. Burns (1 January 2001). The Scientific Revolution: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-87436-875-8. William E. Burns (1 January 2001). The Scientific Revolution: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-87436-875-8.The Scientific Revolution: An EncyclopediaISBN978-0-87436-875-8  ^ Shapin, Steven (1996). The Scientific Revolution. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-75021-3. ^^^Shapin, Steven (1996). The Scientific Revolution. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-75021-3. Shapin, Steven (1996). The Scientific Revolution. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-75021-3.The Scientific RevolutionUniversity of Chicago PressISBN0-226-75021-3  ^ Newton, Sir Isaac (1729). The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy II. p. 255. ^^^Newton, Sir Isaac (1729). The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy II. p. 255. Newton, Sir Isaac (1729). The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy II. p. 255.The Mathematical Principles of Natural PhilosophyThe Mathematical Principles of Natural PhilosophyII  ^ Sean Carroll (7 January 2010). From Eternity to Here: The Quest for the Ultimate Theory of Time. Penguin Group US. ISBN 978-1-101-15215-7. ^^^Sean Carroll (7 January 2010). From Eternity to Here: The Quest for the Ultimate Theory of Time. Penguin Group US. ISBN 978-1-101-15215-7. Sean Carroll (7 January 2010). From Eternity to Here: The Quest for the Ultimate Theory of Time. Penguin Group US. ISBN 978-1-101-15215-7.From Eternity to Here: The Quest for the Ultimate Theory of TimeISBN978-1-101-15215-7  ^ Faraday, M. (1850). "Experimental Researches in Electricity. Twenty-Fourth Series. On the Possible Relation of Gravity to Electricity". Abstracts of the Papers Communicated to the Royal Society of London 5: 994–995. doi:10.1098/rspl.1843.0267. ^^^Faraday, M. (1850). "Experimental Researches in Electricity. Twenty-Fourth Series. On the Possible Relation of Gravity to Electricity". Abstracts of the Papers Communicated to the Royal Society of London 5: 994–995. doi:10.1098/rspl.1843.0267. Faraday, M. (1850). "Experimental Researches in Electricity. Twenty-Fourth Series. On the Possible Relation of Gravity to Electricity". Abstracts of the Papers Communicated to the Royal Society of London 5: 994–995. doi:10.1098/rspl.1843.0267.Abstracts of the Papers Communicated to the Royal Society of London5doi10.1098/rspl.1843.0267  ^ Gorban, Alexander N.; Karlin, Ilya (2013). "Hilbert's 6th Problem: Exact and approximate hydrodynamic manifolds for kinetic equations". Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 51 (2): 187. doi:10.1090/S0273-0979-2013-01439-3. ^^^Gorban, Alexander N.; Karlin, Ilya (2013). "Hilbert's 6th Problem: Exact and approximate hydrodynamic manifolds for kinetic equations". Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 51 (2): 187. doi:10.1090/S0273-0979-2013-01439-3. Gorban, Alexander N.; Karlin, Ilya (2013). "Hilbert's 6th Problem: Exact and approximate hydrodynamic manifolds for kinetic equations". Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 51 (2): 187. doi:10.1090/S0273-0979-2013-01439-3.Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society51doi10.1090/S0273-0979-2013-01439-3  ^ Dirac, P.A.M. (1929). "Quantum mechanics of many-electron systems". Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A 123 (792): 714. Bibcode:1929RSPSA.123..714D. doi:10.1098/rspa.1929.0094. ^^^Dirac, P.A.M. (1929). "Quantum mechanics of many-electron systems". Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A 123 (792): 714. Bibcode:1929RSPSA.123..714D. doi:10.1098/rspa.1929.0094. Dirac, P.A.M. (1929). "Quantum mechanics of many-electron systems". Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A 123 (792): 714. Bibcode:1929RSPSA.123..714D. doi:10.1098/rspa.1929.0094.Proceedings of the Royal Society of London AProceedings of the Royal Society of London A123Bibcode1929RSPSA.123..714Ddoi10.1098/rspa.1929.0094  ^ Abraham Pais (23 September 1982). Subtle is the Lord : The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-152402-8. ^^^Abraham Pais (23 September 1982). Subtle is the Lord : The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-152402-8. Abraham Pais (23 September 1982). Subtle is the Lord : The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-152402-8.Subtle is the Lord : The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein: The Science and the Life of Albert EinsteinISBN978-0-19-152402-8  ^ Weinberg (1993), Ch. 5^^^Weinberg (1993), Ch. 5^ Holloway, M (2005). "The Beauty of Branes" (PDF). Scientific American (Scientific American) 293 (4): 38. Bibcode:2005SciAm.293d..38H. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1005-38. PMID 16196251. Retrieved August 13, 2012. ^^^Holloway, M (2005). "The Beauty of Branes" (PDF). Scientific American (Scientific American) 293 (4): 38. Bibcode:2005SciAm.293d..38H. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1005-38. PMID 16196251. Retrieved August 13, 2012. Holloway, M (2005). "The Beauty of Branes" (PDF). Scientific American (Scientific American) 293 (4): 38. Bibcode:2005SciAm.293d..38H. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1005-38. PMID 16196251. Retrieved August 13, 2012."The Beauty of Branes"(PDF)Scientific American293Bibcode2005SciAm.293d..38Hdoi10.1038/scientificamerican1005-38PMID16196251. Retrieved August 13, 2012August 13,  ^ Nilles, Hans Peter; Ramos-Sánchez, Saúl; Ratz, Michael; Vaudrevange, Patrick K. S. (2008). "From strings to the MSSM". The European Physical Journal C 59 (2): 249. arXiv:0806.3905. Bibcode:2009EPJC...59..249N. doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-008-0740-1. ^^^Nilles, Hans Peter; Ramos-Sánchez, Saúl; Ratz, Michael; Vaudrevange, Patrick K. S. (2008). "From strings to the MSSM". The European Physical Journal C 59 (2): 249. arXiv:0806.3905. Bibcode:2009EPJC...59..249N. doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-008-0740-1. Nilles, Hans Peter; Ramos-Sánchez, Saúl; Ratz, Michael; Vaudrevange, Patrick K. S. (2008). "From strings to the MSSM". The European Physical Journal C 59 (2): 249. arXiv:0806.3905. Bibcode:2009EPJC...59..249N. doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-008-0740-1.The European Physical Journal C59arXiv0806.3905Bibcode2009EPJC...59..249Ndoi10.1140/epjc/s10052-008-0740-1  ^ Beasley, Chris; Heckman, Jonathan J; Vafa, Cumrun (2009). "GUTs and exceptional branes in F-theory — I". Journal of High Energy Physics 2009: 058. arXiv:0802.3391. Bibcode:2009JHEP...01..058B. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2009/01/058. ^^^Beasley, Chris; Heckman, Jonathan J; Vafa, Cumrun (2009). "GUTs and exceptional branes in F-theory — I". Journal of High Energy Physics 2009: 058. arXiv:0802.3391. Bibcode:2009JHEP...01..058B. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2009/01/058. Beasley, Chris; Heckman, Jonathan J; Vafa, Cumrun (2009). "GUTs and exceptional branes in F-theory — I". Journal of High Energy Physics 2009: 058. arXiv:0802.3391. Bibcode:2009JHEP...01..058B. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2009/01/058.Journal of High Energy Physics2009arXiv0802.3391Bibcode2009JHEP...01..058Bdoi10.1088/1126-6708/2009/01/058  ^ Donagi, Ron; Wijnholt, Martijn (2008). "Model Building with F-Theory". arXiv:0802.2969v3 [hep-th]. ^^^Donagi, Ron; Wijnholt, Martijn (2008). "Model Building with F-Theory". arXiv:0802.2969v3 [hep-th]. Donagi, Ron; Wijnholt, Martijn (2008). "Model Building with F-Theory". arXiv:0802.2969v3 [hep-th].arXiv0802.2969v3hep-th  ^ Heckman, Jonathan J.; Vafa, Cumrun (2008). "Flavor Hierarchy from F-theory". Nuclear Physics B 837: 137–151. arXiv:0811.2417v3. doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2010.05.009. ^^^Heckman, Jonathan J.; Vafa, Cumrun (2008). "Flavor Hierarchy from F-theory". Nuclear Physics B 837: 137–151. arXiv:0811.2417v3. doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2010.05.009. Heckman, Jonathan J.; Vafa, Cumrun (2008). "Flavor Hierarchy from F-theory". Nuclear Physics B 837: 137–151. arXiv:0811.2417v3. doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2010.05.009.Nuclear Physics B837arXiv0811.2417v3doi10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2010.05.009  ^ Strominger, Andrew; Vafa, Cumrun (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379: 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0. ^^^Strominger, Andrew; Vafa, Cumrun (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379: 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0. Strominger, Andrew; Vafa, Cumrun (1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B 379: 99. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0.Physics Letters B379arXivhep-th/9601029Bibcode1996PhLB..379...99Sdoi10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0  ^ Horowitz, Gary (1996). "Gravitational Wave Astronomy". The Origin of Black Hole Entropy in String Theory. Astrophysics and Space Science Library 211. p. 95. arXiv:gr-qc/9604051. doi:10.1007/978-94-011-5812-1_7. ISBN 978-94-010-6455-2. ^^^Horowitz, Gary (1996). "Gravitational Wave Astronomy". The Origin of Black Hole Entropy in String Theory. Astrophysics and Space Science Library 211. p. 95. arXiv:gr-qc/9604051. doi:10.1007/978-94-011-5812-1_7. ISBN 978-94-010-6455-2. Horowitz, Gary (1996). "Gravitational Wave Astronomy". The Origin of Black Hole Entropy in String Theory. Astrophysics and Space Science Library 211. p. 95. arXiv:gr-qc/9604051. doi:10.1007/978-94-011-5812-1_7. ISBN 978-94-010-6455-2.The Origin of Black Hole Entropy in String Theory211arXivgr-qc/9604051doi10.1007/978-94-011-5812-1_7ISBN978-94-010-6455-2  ^ Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R.; Strominger, Andrew (1995). "Black hole condensation and the unification of string vacua". Nuclear Physics B 451: 109. arXiv:hep-th/9504145. Bibcode:1995NuPhB.451..109G. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(95)00371-X. ^^^Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R.; Strominger, Andrew (1995). "Black hole condensation and the unification of string vacua". Nuclear Physics B 451: 109. arXiv:hep-th/9504145. Bibcode:1995NuPhB.451..109G. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(95)00371-X. Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R.; Strominger, Andrew (1995). "Black hole condensation and the unification of string vacua". Nuclear Physics B 451: 109. arXiv:hep-th/9504145. Bibcode:1995NuPhB.451..109G. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(95)00371-X.Nuclear Physics B451arXivhep-th/9504145Bibcode1995NuPhB.451..109Gdoi10.1016/0550-3213(95)00371-X  ^ Aspinwall, Paul S.; Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R. (1994). "Calabi-Yau moduli space, mirror manifolds and spacetime topology change in string theory". Nuclear Physics B 416 (2): 414. arXiv:hep-th/9309097. Bibcode:1994NuPhB.416..414A. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(94)90321-2. ^^^Aspinwall, Paul S.; Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R. (1994). "Calabi-Yau moduli space, mirror manifolds and spacetime topology change in string theory". Nuclear Physics B 416 (2): 414. arXiv:hep-th/9309097. Bibcode:1994NuPhB.416..414A. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(94)90321-2. Aspinwall, Paul S.; Greene, Brian R.; Morrison, David R. (1994). "Calabi-Yau moduli space, mirror manifolds and spacetime topology change in string theory". Nuclear Physics B 416 (2): 414. arXiv:hep-th/9309097. Bibcode:1994NuPhB.416..414A. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(94)90321-2.Nuclear Physics B416arXivhep-th/9309097Bibcode1994NuPhB.416..414Adoi10.1016/0550-3213(94)90321-2  ^ Adams, Allan; Liu, Xiao; McGreevy, John; Saltman, Alex; Silverstein, Eva (2005). "Things fall apart: Topology change from winding tachyons". Journal of High Energy Physics 2005 (10): 033. arXiv:hep-th/0502021. Bibcode:2005JHEP...10..033A. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2005/10/033. ^^^Adams, Allan; Liu, Xiao; McGreevy, John; Saltman, Alex; Silverstein, Eva (2005). "Things fall apart: Topology change from winding tachyons". Journal of High Energy Physics 2005 (10): 033. arXiv:hep-th/0502021. Bibcode:2005JHEP...10..033A. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2005/10/033. Adams, Allan; Liu, Xiao; McGreevy, John; Saltman, Alex; Silverstein, Eva (2005). "Things fall apart: Topology change from winding tachyons". Journal of High Energy Physics 2005 (10): 033. arXiv:hep-th/0502021. Bibcode:2005JHEP...10..033A. doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2005/10/033.Journal of High Energy Physics2005arXivhep-th/0502021Bibcode2005JHEP...10..033Adoi10.1088/1126-6708/2005/10/033  ^ Smolin, Lee (2006). The Trouble With Physics: The Rise of String Theory, the Fall of a Science, and What Comes Next. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-55105-7. ^^^Smolin, Lee (2006). The Trouble With Physics: The Rise of String Theory, the Fall of a Science, and What Comes Next. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-55105-7. Smolin, Lee (2006). The Trouble With Physics: The Rise of String Theory, the Fall of a Science, and What Comes Next. Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-55105-7.The Trouble With Physics: The Rise of String Theory, the Fall of a Science, and What Comes NextThe Trouble With PhysicsISBN978-0-618-55105-7  ^ Duff, M. J. (2011). "String and M-Theory: Answering the Critics". Foundations of Physics 43: 182. arXiv:1112.0788. Bibcode:2013FoPh...43..182D. doi:10.1007/s10701-011-9618-4. ^^^Duff, M. J. (2011). "String and M-Theory: Answering the Critics". Foundations of Physics 43: 182. arXiv:1112.0788. Bibcode:2013FoPh...43..182D. doi:10.1007/s10701-011-9618-4. Duff, M. J. (2011). "String and M-Theory: Answering the Critics". Foundations of Physics 43: 182. arXiv:1112.0788. Bibcode:2013FoPh...43..182D. doi:10.1007/s10701-011-9618-4.Foundations of Physics43arXiv1112.0788Bibcode2013FoPh...43..182Ddoi10.1007/s10701-011-9618-4  ^ Potter, Franklin (15 February 2005). "Leptons And Quarks In A Discrete Spacetime" (PDF). Frank Potter's Science Gems. Retrieved 2009-12-01. ^^^Potter, Franklin (15 February 2005). "Leptons And Quarks In A Discrete Spacetime" (PDF). Frank Potter's Science Gems. Retrieved 2009-12-01. Potter, Franklin (15 February 2005). "Leptons And Quarks In A Discrete Spacetime" (PDF). Frank Potter's Science Gems. Retrieved 2009-12-01."Leptons And Quarks In A Discrete Spacetime"(PDF)Frank Potter's Science Gems. Retrieved 2009-12-012009-12-01  ^ Bilson-Thompson, Sundance O.; Markopoulou, Fotini; Smolin, Lee (2007). "Quantum gravity and the standard model". Classical and Quantum Gravity 24 (16): 3975–3994. arXiv:hep-th/0603022. Bibcode:2007CQGra..24.3975B. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/24/16/002. ^^^Bilson-Thompson, Sundance O.; Markopoulou, Fotini; Smolin, Lee (2007). "Quantum gravity and the standard model". Classical and Quantum Gravity 24 (16): 3975–3994. arXiv:hep-th/0603022. Bibcode:2007CQGra..24.3975B. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/24/16/002. Bilson-Thompson, Sundance O.; Markopoulou, Fotini; Smolin, Lee (2007). "Quantum gravity and the standard model". Classical and Quantum Gravity 24 (16): 3975–3994. arXiv:hep-th/0603022. Bibcode:2007CQGra..24.3975B. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/24/16/002.Classical and Quantum Gravity24arXivhep-th/0603022Bibcode2007CQGra..24.3975Bdoi10.1088/0264-9381/24/16/002  ^ Castelvecchi, Davide; Valerie Jamieson (August 12, 2006). "You are made of space-time". New Scientist (2564). ^^^Castelvecchi, Davide; Valerie Jamieson (August 12, 2006). "You are made of space-time". New Scientist (2564). Castelvecchi, Davide; Valerie Jamieson (August 12, 2006). "You are made of space-time". New Scientist (2564)."You are made of space-time"New Scientist  ^ Sundance Bilson-Thompson; Jonathan Hackett; Lou Kauffman; Lee Smolin (2008). "Particle Identifications from Symmetries of Braided Ribbon Network Invariants". arXiv:0804.0037 [hep-th]. ^^^Sundance Bilson-Thompson; Jonathan Hackett; Lou Kauffman; Lee Smolin (2008). "Particle Identifications from Symmetries of Braided Ribbon Network Invariants". arXiv:0804.0037 [hep-th]. Sundance Bilson-Thompson; Jonathan Hackett; Lou Kauffman; Lee Smolin (2008). "Particle Identifications from Symmetries of Braided Ribbon Network Invariants". arXiv:0804.0037 [hep-th].arXiv0804.0037hep-th  ^ F. Finster; J. Kleiner (2015). "Causal fermion systems as a candidate for a unified physical theory". Journal of Physics: Conference Series 626 (2015): 012020. arXiv:1502.03587. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/626/1/012020. ^^^F. Finster; J. Kleiner (2015). "Causal fermion systems as a candidate for a unified physical theory". Journal of Physics: Conference Series 626 (2015): 012020. arXiv:1502.03587. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/626/1/012020. F. Finster; J. Kleiner (2015). "Causal fermion systems as a candidate for a unified physical theory". Journal of Physics: Conference Series 626 (2015): 012020. arXiv:1502.03587. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/626/1/012020.Journal of Physics: Conference Series626arXiv1502.03587doi10.1088/1742-6596/626/1/012020  ^ A. G. Lisi (2007). "An Exceptionally Simple Theory of Everything". arXiv:0711.0770 [hep-th]. ^^^A. G. Lisi (2007). "An Exceptionally Simple Theory of Everything". arXiv:0711.0770 [hep-th]. A. G. Lisi (2007). "An Exceptionally Simple Theory of Everything". arXiv:0711.0770 [hep-th].arXiv0711.0770hep-th  ^ Jaki, S.L. (1966). The Relevance of Physics. Chicago Press. pp. 127–130. ^^^Jaki, S.L. (1966). The Relevance of Physics. Chicago Press. pp. 127–130. Jaki, S.L. (1966). The Relevance of Physics. Chicago Press. pp. 127–130.The Relevance of Physics  ^ Stanley L. Jaki (2004) "A Late Awakening to Gödel in Physics", pp. 8–9.^^^Stanley L. Jaki (2004) "A Late Awakening to Gödel in Physics", pp. 8–9.A Late Awakening to Gödel in Physics^ Freeman Dyson, NYRB, May 13, 2004^^^Freeman Dyson, NYRB, May 13, 2004^ Stephen Hawking, Gödel and the end of physics, July 20, 2002^^^Stephen Hawking, Gödel and the end of physics, July 20, 2002Gödel and the end of physics^ Schmidhuber, Jürgen (1997). A Computer Scientist's View of Life, the Universe, and Everything. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer. pp. 201–208. doi:10.1007/BFb0052071. ISBN 978-3-540-63746-2. ^^^Schmidhuber, Jürgen (1997). A Computer Scientist's View of Life, the Universe, and Everything. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer. pp. 201–208. doi:10.1007/BFb0052071. ISBN 978-3-540-63746-2. Schmidhuber, Jürgen (1997). A Computer Scientist's View of Life, the Universe, and Everything. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer. pp. 201–208. doi:10.1007/BFb0052071. ISBN 978-3-540-63746-2.A Computer Scientist's View of Life, the Universe, and Everything. Lecture Notes in Computer ScienceA Computer Scientist's View of Life, the Universe, and Everything. Lecture Notes in Computer ScienceSpringerdoi10.1007/BFb0052071ISBN978-3-540-63746-2  ^ Schmidhuber, Jürgen (2002). "Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit". Sections in: Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science ():587-612 (2002). Section 6 in: the Speed Prior: A New Simplicity Measure Yielding Near-Optimal Computable Predictions. in J. Kivinen and R. H. Sloan, editors, Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT 2002), Sydney, Australia, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 216--228. Springer, 2002 13 (4): 1–5. arXiv:quant-ph/0011122. ^^^Schmidhuber, Jürgen (2002). "Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit". Sections in: Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science ():587-612 (2002). Section 6 in: the Speed Prior: A New Simplicity Measure Yielding Near-Optimal Computable Predictions. in J. Kivinen and R. H. Sloan, editors, Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT 2002), Sydney, Australia, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 216--228. Springer, 2002 13 (4): 1–5. arXiv:quant-ph/0011122. Schmidhuber, Jürgen (2002). "Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit". Sections in: Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science ():587-612 (2002). Section 6 in: the Speed Prior: A New Simplicity Measure Yielding Near-Optimal Computable Predictions. in J. Kivinen and R. H. Sloan, editors, Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT 2002), Sydney, Australia, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 216--228. Springer, 2002 13 (4): 1–5. arXiv:quant-ph/0011122.Sections in: Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogorov complexities and nonenumerable universal measures computable in the limit. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science ():587-612 (2002). Section 6 in: the Speed Prior: A New Simplicity Measure Yielding Near-Optimal Computable Predictions. in J. Kivinen and R. H. Sloan, editors, Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT 2002), Sydney, Australia, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 216--228. Springer, 200213arXivquant-ph/0011122  ^ Feferman, Solomon (17 November 2006). "The nature and significance of Gödel’s incompleteness theorems" (PDF). Institute for Advanced Study. Retrieved 2009-01-12. ^^^Feferman, Solomon (17 November 2006). "The nature and significance of Gödel’s incompleteness theorems" (PDF). Institute for Advanced Study. Retrieved 2009-01-12. Feferman, Solomon (17 November 2006). "The nature and significance of Gödel’s incompleteness theorems" (PDF). Institute for Advanced Study. Retrieved 2009-01-12."The nature and significance of Gödel’s incompleteness theorems"(PDF)Institute for Advanced Study. Retrieved 2009-01-122009-01-12  ^ Robertson, Douglas S. (2007). "Goedel's Theorem, the Theory of Everything, and the Future of Science and Mathematics". Complexity 5 (5): 22–27. doi:10.1002/1099-0526(200005/06)5:5<22::AID-CPLX4>3.0.CO;2-0. ^^^Robertson, Douglas S. (2007). "Goedel's Theorem, the Theory of Everything, and the Future of Science and Mathematics". Complexity 5 (5): 22–27. doi:10.1002/1099-0526(200005/06)5:5<22::AID-CPLX4>3.0.CO;2-0. Robertson, Douglas S. (2007). "Goedel's Theorem, the Theory of Everything, and the Future of Science and Mathematics". Complexity 5 (5): 22–27. doi:10.1002/1099-0526(200005/06)5:5<22::AID-CPLX4>3.0.CO;2-0.ComplexityComplexity5doi10.1002/1099-0526(200005/06)5:5<22::AID-CPLX4>3.0.CO;2-0  ^ Hawking, Stephen (20 July 2002). "Gödel and the end of physics". Retrieved 2009-12-01. ^^^Hawking, Stephen (20 July 2002). "Gödel and the end of physics". Retrieved 2009-12-01. Hawking, Stephen (20 July 2002). "Gödel and the end of physics". Retrieved 2009-12-01."Gödel and the end of physics". Retrieved 2009-12-012009-12-01  ^ Einstein, letter to Felix Klein, 1917. (On determinism and approximations.) Quoted in Pais (1982), Ch. 17.^^^Einstein, letter to Felix Klein, 1917. (On determinism and approximations.) Quoted in Pais (1982), Ch. 17.^ Weinberg (1993), Ch 2.^^^Weinberg (1993), Ch 2.^ Weinberg (1993) p. 5^^^Weinberg (1993) p. 5Bibliography[edit]Bibliography[edit][edit]
Pais, Abraham (1982) Subtle is the Lord...: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein (Oxford University Press, Oxford, . Ch. 17, ISBN 0-19-853907-X
Weinberg, Steven (1993) Dreams of a Final Theory: The Search for the Fundamental Laws of Nature, Hutchinson Radius, London, ISBN 0-09-177395-4
Pais, Abraham (1982) Subtle is the Lord...: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein (Oxford University Press, Oxford, . Ch. 17, ISBN 0-19-853907-XPais, AbrahamSubtle is the Lord...: The Science and the Life of Albert EinsteinISBN 0-19-853907-XWeinberg, Steven (1993) Dreams of a Final Theory: The Search for the Fundamental Laws of Nature, Hutchinson Radius, London, ISBN 0-09-177395-4Weinberg, StevenDreams of a Final Theory: The Search for the Fundamental Laws of NatureISBN 0-09-177395-4External links[edit]External links[edit][edit]
The Elegant Universe, Nova episode about the search for the theory of everything and string theory.
Theory of Everything, freeview video by the Vega Science Trust, BBC and Open University.
The Theory of Everything: Are we getting closer, or is a final theory of matter and the universe impossible? Debate between John Ellis (physicist), Frank Close and Nicholas Maxwell.
Why The World Exists, a discussion between physicist Laura Mersini-Houghton, cosmologist George Francis Rayner Ellis and philosopher David Wallace about dark matter, parallel universes and explaining why these and the present Universe exist.
The Elegant Universe, Nova episode about the search for the theory of everything and string theory.The Elegant UniverseNovaNovaTheory of Everything, freeview video by the Vega Science Trust, BBC and Open University.Theory of EverythingVega Science TrustOpen UniversityThe Theory of Everything: Are we getting closer, or is a final theory of matter and the universe impossible? Debate between John Ellis (physicist), Frank Close and Nicholas Maxwell.The Theory of EverythingJohn Ellis (physicist)Frank CloseNicholas MaxwellWhy The World Exists, a discussion between physicist Laura Mersini-Houghton, cosmologist George Francis Rayner Ellis and philosopher David Wallace about dark matter, parallel universes and explaining why these and the present Universe exist.Why The World ExistsLaura Mersini-HoughtonGeorge Francis Rayner Ellis







v
t
e


Theories of gravitation






Standard




Newtonian gravity (NG)



Newton's law of universal gravitation
History of gravitational theory








General relativity (GR)



Introduction
History
Mathematics
Resources
Tests
Post-Newtonian formalism
Linearized gravity
ADM formalism











Alternatives to
general relativity




Paradigms



Classical theories of gravitation
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything








Classical




Einstein–Cartan
Bimetric theories
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism
Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke


Scalar–tensor–vector
Conformal gravity
Scalar theories

Nordström


Whitehead
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
Tensor–vector–scalar
Chameleon
Pressuron









Quantisation




Euclidean quantum gravity
Canonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam


Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
DGP model









Unification



Kaluza–Klein theory

Dilaton


Supergravity








Unification and
quantisation



Noncommutative geometry

Self-creation cosmology


Semiclassical gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum


String theory

M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory


Twistor theory

Twistor string theory










Generalisations /
Extensions of GR



Scale relativity
Liouville gravity
Lovelock theory
(2+1)-dimensional topological gravity
Gauss–Bonnet gravity
Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity











Pre-Newtonian theories
and Toy models



Aristotelian physics
CGHS model
RST model
Mechanical explanations

Fatio–Le Sage
Entropic gravity


Gravitational interaction of antimatter














v
t
e


Theories of gravitation






Standard




Newtonian gravity (NG)



Newton's law of universal gravitation
History of gravitational theory








General relativity (GR)



Introduction
History
Mathematics
Resources
Tests
Post-Newtonian formalism
Linearized gravity
ADM formalism











Alternatives to
general relativity




Paradigms



Classical theories of gravitation
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything








Classical




Einstein–Cartan
Bimetric theories
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism
Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke


Scalar–tensor–vector
Conformal gravity
Scalar theories

Nordström


Whitehead
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
Tensor–vector–scalar
Chameleon
Pressuron









Quantisation




Euclidean quantum gravity
Canonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam


Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
DGP model









Unification



Kaluza–Klein theory

Dilaton


Supergravity








Unification and
quantisation



Noncommutative geometry

Self-creation cosmology


Semiclassical gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum


String theory

M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory


Twistor theory

Twistor string theory










Generalisations /
Extensions of GR



Scale relativity
Liouville gravity
Lovelock theory
(2+1)-dimensional topological gravity
Gauss–Bonnet gravity
Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity











Pre-Newtonian theories
and Toy models



Aristotelian physics
CGHS model
RST model
Mechanical explanations

Fatio–Le Sage
Entropic gravity


Gravitational interaction of antimatter












v
t
e


Theories of gravitation






Standard




Newtonian gravity (NG)



Newton's law of universal gravitation
History of gravitational theory








General relativity (GR)



Introduction
History
Mathematics
Resources
Tests
Post-Newtonian formalism
Linearized gravity
ADM formalism











Alternatives to
general relativity




Paradigms



Classical theories of gravitation
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything








Classical




Einstein–Cartan
Bimetric theories
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism
Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke


Scalar–tensor–vector
Conformal gravity
Scalar theories

Nordström


Whitehead
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
Tensor–vector–scalar
Chameleon
Pressuron









Quantisation




Euclidean quantum gravity
Canonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam


Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
DGP model









Unification



Kaluza–Klein theory

Dilaton


Supergravity








Unification and
quantisation



Noncommutative geometry

Self-creation cosmology


Semiclassical gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum


String theory

M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory


Twistor theory

Twistor string theory










Generalisations /
Extensions of GR



Scale relativity
Liouville gravity
Lovelock theory
(2+1)-dimensional topological gravity
Gauss–Bonnet gravity
Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity











Pre-Newtonian theories
and Toy models



Aristotelian physics
CGHS model
RST model
Mechanical explanations

Fatio–Le Sage
Entropic gravity


Gravitational interaction of antimatter










v
t
e


Theories of gravitation






Standard




Newtonian gravity (NG)



Newton's law of universal gravitation
History of gravitational theory








General relativity (GR)



Introduction
History
Mathematics
Resources
Tests
Post-Newtonian formalism
Linearized gravity
ADM formalism











Alternatives to
general relativity




Paradigms



Classical theories of gravitation
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything








Classical




Einstein–Cartan
Bimetric theories
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism
Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke


Scalar–tensor–vector
Conformal gravity
Scalar theories

Nordström


Whitehead
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
Tensor–vector–scalar
Chameleon
Pressuron









Quantisation




Euclidean quantum gravity
Canonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam


Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
DGP model









Unification



Kaluza–Klein theory

Dilaton


Supergravity








Unification and
quantisation



Noncommutative geometry

Self-creation cosmology


Semiclassical gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum


String theory

M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory


Twistor theory

Twistor string theory










Generalisations /
Extensions of GR



Scale relativity
Liouville gravity
Lovelock theory
(2+1)-dimensional topological gravity
Gauss–Bonnet gravity
Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity











Pre-Newtonian theories
and Toy models



Aristotelian physics
CGHS model
RST model
Mechanical explanations

Fatio–Le Sage
Entropic gravity


Gravitational interaction of antimatter








v
t
e


Theories of gravitation




v
t
e


Theories of gravitation


v
t
e


v
t
e
vvvttteeeTheories of gravitationTheories of gravitation


Standard




Newtonian gravity (NG)



Newton's law of universal gravitation
History of gravitational theory








General relativity (GR)



Introduction
History
Mathematics
Resources
Tests
Post-Newtonian formalism
Linearized gravity
ADM formalism






Standard



Newtonian gravity (NG)



Newton's law of universal gravitation
History of gravitational theory








General relativity (GR)



Introduction
History
Mathematics
Resources
Tests
Post-Newtonian formalism
Linearized gravity
ADM formalism







Newtonian gravity (NG)



Newton's law of universal gravitation
History of gravitational theory








General relativity (GR)



Introduction
History
Mathematics
Resources
Tests
Post-Newtonian formalism
Linearized gravity
ADM formalism





Newtonian gravity (NG)



Newton's law of universal gravitation
History of gravitational theory



Newtonian gravity (NG)


Newton's law of universal gravitation
History of gravitational theory




Newton's law of universal gravitation
History of gravitational theory


Newton's law of universal gravitation
History of gravitational theory
Newton's law of universal gravitationNewton's law of universal gravitationHistory of gravitational theoryHistory of gravitational theory


General relativity (GR)



Introduction
History
Mathematics
Resources
Tests
Post-Newtonian formalism
Linearized gravity
ADM formalism



General relativity (GR)General relativity (GR)


Introduction
History
Mathematics
Resources
Tests
Post-Newtonian formalism
Linearized gravity
ADM formalism




Introduction
History
Mathematics
Resources
Tests
Post-Newtonian formalism
Linearized gravity
ADM formalism


Introduction
History
Mathematics
Resources
Tests
Post-Newtonian formalism
Linearized gravity
ADM formalism
IntroductionIntroductionHistoryHistoryMathematicsMathematicsResourcesResourcesTestsTestsPost-Newtonian formalismPost-Newtonian formalismLinearized gravityLinearized gravityADM formalismADM formalism


Alternatives to
general relativity




Paradigms



Classical theories of gravitation
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything








Classical




Einstein–Cartan
Bimetric theories
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism
Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke


Scalar–tensor–vector
Conformal gravity
Scalar theories

Nordström


Whitehead
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
Tensor–vector–scalar
Chameleon
Pressuron









Quantisation




Euclidean quantum gravity
Canonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam


Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
DGP model









Unification



Kaluza–Klein theory

Dilaton


Supergravity








Unification and
quantisation



Noncommutative geometry

Self-creation cosmology


Semiclassical gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum


String theory

M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory


Twistor theory

Twistor string theory










Generalisations /
Extensions of GR



Scale relativity
Liouville gravity
Lovelock theory
(2+1)-dimensional topological gravity
Gauss–Bonnet gravity
Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity






Alternatives to
general relativityAlternatives to
general relativity



Paradigms



Classical theories of gravitation
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything








Classical




Einstein–Cartan
Bimetric theories
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism
Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke


Scalar–tensor–vector
Conformal gravity
Scalar theories

Nordström


Whitehead
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
Tensor–vector–scalar
Chameleon
Pressuron









Quantisation




Euclidean quantum gravity
Canonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam


Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
DGP model









Unification



Kaluza–Klein theory

Dilaton


Supergravity








Unification and
quantisation



Noncommutative geometry

Self-creation cosmology


Semiclassical gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum


String theory

M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory


Twistor theory

Twistor string theory










Generalisations /
Extensions of GR



Scale relativity
Liouville gravity
Lovelock theory
(2+1)-dimensional topological gravity
Gauss–Bonnet gravity
Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity







Paradigms



Classical theories of gravitation
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything








Classical




Einstein–Cartan
Bimetric theories
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism
Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke


Scalar–tensor–vector
Conformal gravity
Scalar theories

Nordström


Whitehead
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
Tensor–vector–scalar
Chameleon
Pressuron









Quantisation




Euclidean quantum gravity
Canonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam


Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
DGP model









Unification



Kaluza–Klein theory

Dilaton


Supergravity








Unification and
quantisation



Noncommutative geometry

Self-creation cosmology


Semiclassical gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum


String theory

M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory


Twistor theory

Twistor string theory










Generalisations /
Extensions of GR



Scale relativity
Liouville gravity
Lovelock theory
(2+1)-dimensional topological gravity
Gauss–Bonnet gravity
Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity





Paradigms



Classical theories of gravitation
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything



Paradigms


Classical theories of gravitation
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything




Classical theories of gravitation
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything


Classical theories of gravitation
Quantum gravity
Theory of everything
Classical theories of gravitationClassical theories of gravitationQuantum gravityQuantum gravityTheory of everythingTheory of everything


Classical




Einstein–Cartan
Bimetric theories
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism
Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke


Scalar–tensor–vector
Conformal gravity
Scalar theories

Nordström


Whitehead
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
Tensor–vector–scalar
Chameleon
Pressuron




Classical



Einstein–Cartan
Bimetric theories
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism
Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke


Scalar–tensor–vector
Conformal gravity
Scalar theories

Nordström


Whitehead
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
Tensor–vector–scalar
Chameleon
Pressuron






Einstein–Cartan
Bimetric theories
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism
Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke


Scalar–tensor–vector
Conformal gravity
Scalar theories

Nordström


Whitehead
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
Tensor–vector–scalar
Chameleon
Pressuron




Einstein–Cartan
Bimetric theories
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism
Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke


Scalar–tensor–vector
Conformal gravity
Scalar theories

Nordström


Whitehead
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
Tensor–vector–scalar
Chameleon
Pressuron


Einstein–Cartan
Bimetric theories
Gauge theory gravity
Teleparallelism
Composite gravity
f(R) gravity
Massive gravity
Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)
Nonsymmetric gravitation
Scalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke


Scalar–tensor–vector
Conformal gravity
Scalar theories

Nordström


Whitehead
Geometrodynamics
Induced gravity
Tensor–vector–scalar
Chameleon
Pressuron
Einstein–CartanEinstein–CartanBimetric theoriesBimetric theoriesGauge theory gravityGauge theory gravityTeleparallelismTeleparallelismComposite gravityComposite gravityf(R) gravityf(R) gravityfRMassive gravityMassive gravityModified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)Modified Newtonian dynamics (MOND)Nonsymmetric gravitationNonsymmetric gravitationScalar–tensor theories

Brans–Dicke

Scalar–tensor theories
Brans–Dicke
Brans–DickeBrans–DickeBrans–DickeScalar–tensor–vectorScalar–tensor–vectorConformal gravityConformal gravityScalar theories

Nordström

Scalar theories
Nordström
NordströmNordströmNordströmWhiteheadWhiteheadGeometrodynamicsGeometrodynamicsInduced gravityInduced gravityTensor–vector–scalarTensor–vector–scalarChameleonChameleonPressuronPressuron


Quantisation




Euclidean quantum gravity
Canonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam


Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
DGP model




Quantisation



Euclidean quantum gravity
Canonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam


Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
DGP model






Euclidean quantum gravity
Canonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam


Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
DGP model




Euclidean quantum gravity
Canonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam


Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
DGP model


Euclidean quantum gravity
Canonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam


Causal dynamical triangulation
Causal sets
DGP model
Euclidean quantum gravityEuclidean quantum gravityCanonical quantum gravity

Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam

Canonical quantum gravity
Wheeler–DeWitt equation
Loop quantum gravity
Spin foam
Wheeler–DeWitt equationWheeler–DeWitt equationWheeler–DeWitt equationLoop quantum gravityLoop quantum gravityLoop quantum gravitySpin foamSpin foamSpin foamCausal dynamical triangulationCausal dynamical triangulationCausal setsCausal setsDGP modelDGP model


Unification



Kaluza–Klein theory

Dilaton


Supergravity



Unification


Kaluza–Klein theory

Dilaton


Supergravity




Kaluza–Klein theory

Dilaton


Supergravity


Kaluza–Klein theory

Dilaton


Supergravity
Kaluza–Klein theory

Dilaton

Kaluza–Klein theory
Dilaton
DilatonDilatonDilatonSupergravitySupergravity


Unification and
quantisation



Noncommutative geometry

Self-creation cosmology


Semiclassical gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum


String theory

M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory


Twistor theory

Twistor string theory





Unification and
quantisation


Noncommutative geometry

Self-creation cosmology


Semiclassical gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum


String theory

M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory


Twistor theory

Twistor string theory






Noncommutative geometry

Self-creation cosmology


Semiclassical gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum


String theory

M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory


Twistor theory

Twistor string theory




Noncommutative geometry

Self-creation cosmology


Semiclassical gravity
Superfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum


String theory

M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory


Twistor theory

Twistor string theory


Noncommutative geometry

Self-creation cosmology

Noncommutative geometry
Self-creation cosmology
Self-creation cosmologySelf-creation cosmologySelf-creation cosmologySemiclassical gravitySemiclassical gravitySuperfluid vacuum theory

Logarithmic BEC vacuum

Superfluid vacuum theory
Logarithmic BEC vacuum
Logarithmic BEC vacuumLogarithmic BEC vacuumLogarithmic BEC vacuumString theory

M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory

String theory
M-theory
F-theory
Heterotic string theory
Type I string theory
Type 0 string theory
Bosonic string theory
Type II string theory
Little string theory
M-theoryM-theoryM-theoryF-theoryF-theoryF-theoryHeterotic string theoryHeterotic string theoryHeterotic string theoryType I string theoryType I string theoryType I string theoryType 0 string theoryType 0 string theoryType 0 string theoryBosonic string theoryBosonic string theoryBosonic string theoryType II string theoryType II string theoryType II string theoryLittle string theoryLittle string theoryLittle string theoryTwistor theory

Twistor string theory

Twistor theory
Twistor string theory
Twistor string theoryTwistor string theoryTwistor string theory


Generalisations /
Extensions of GR



Scale relativity
Liouville gravity
Lovelock theory
(2+1)-dimensional topological gravity
Gauss–Bonnet gravity
Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity



Generalisations /
Extensions of GR


Scale relativity
Liouville gravity
Lovelock theory
(2+1)-dimensional topological gravity
Gauss–Bonnet gravity
Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity




Scale relativity
Liouville gravity
Lovelock theory
(2+1)-dimensional topological gravity
Gauss–Bonnet gravity
Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity


Scale relativity
Liouville gravity
Lovelock theory
(2+1)-dimensional topological gravity
Gauss–Bonnet gravity
Jackiw–Teitelboim gravity
Scale relativityScale relativityLiouville gravityLiouville gravityLovelock theoryLovelock theory(2+1)-dimensional topological gravity(2+1)-dimensional topological gravityGauss–Bonnet gravityGauss–Bonnet gravityJackiw–Teitelboim gravityJackiw–Teitelboim gravity


Pre-Newtonian theories
and Toy models



Aristotelian physics
CGHS model
RST model
Mechanical explanations

Fatio–Le Sage
Entropic gravity


Gravitational interaction of antimatter



Pre-Newtonian theories
and Toy modelsPre-Newtonian theories
and Toy models


Aristotelian physics
CGHS model
RST model
Mechanical explanations

Fatio–Le Sage
Entropic gravity


Gravitational interaction of antimatter




Aristotelian physics
CGHS model
RST model
Mechanical explanations

Fatio–Le Sage
Entropic gravity


Gravitational interaction of antimatter


Aristotelian physics
CGHS model
RST model
Mechanical explanations

Fatio–Le Sage
Entropic gravity


Gravitational interaction of antimatter
Aristotelian physicsAristotelian physicsCGHS modelCGHS modelRST modelRST modelMechanical explanations

Fatio–Le Sage
Entropic gravity

Mechanical explanations
Fatio–Le Sage
Entropic gravity
Fatio–Le SageFatio–Le SageFatio–Le SageEntropic gravityEntropic gravityEntropic gravityGravitational interaction of antimatterGravitational interaction of antimatter







v
t
e


World view










 
Related terms









Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts & Factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system















 
Aspects










Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping








Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect








Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship








Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena








Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)








Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables








Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing


















 
Examples










Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz








Economic & political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism








Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism




















v
t
e


World view










 
Related terms









Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts & Factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system















 
Aspects










Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping








Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect








Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship








Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena








Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)








Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables








Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing


















 
Examples










Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz








Economic & political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism








Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism


















v
t
e


World view










 
Related terms









Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts & Factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system















 
Aspects










Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping








Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect








Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship








Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena








Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)








Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables








Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing


















 
Examples










Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz








Economic & political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism








Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism
















v
t
e


World view










 
Related terms









Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts & Factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system















 
Aspects










Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping








Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect








Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship








Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena








Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)








Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables








Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing


















 
Examples










Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz








Economic & political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism








Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism














v
t
e


World view




v
t
e


World view


v
t
e


v
t
e
vvvttteeeWorld viewWorld view






 
Related terms









Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts & Factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system










 
Related terms









Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts & Factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system







 
Related terms









Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts & Factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system





 
Related terms

 
Related terms
 Related terms





Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts & Factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system






Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts & Factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system




Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts & Factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system


Basic beliefs/Beliefs
Collective consciousness/Collective unconscious
Conceptual system
Context
Conventions
Cultural movement
Epic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epics
Facts & Factoids
Framing
Ideology
Life stance
Lifestyle
Memes/Memeplex
Mental model
Metanarrative
Mindset
Norms
Paradigm
Philosophical theory
Point of view
Presuppositions
Reality tunnel
Received view
Schemata
School of thought
Set
Social reality
Theory of everything
Umwelt
Value system
Basic beliefs/BeliefsBasic beliefsBeliefsCollective consciousness/Collective unconsciousCollective consciousnessCollective unconsciousConceptual systemConceptual systemContextContextConventionsConventionsCultural movementCultural movementEpic poetry/National epics/Pan-national epicsEpic poetryNational epicsPan-national epicsFacts & FactoidsFactsFactoidsFramingFramingIdeologyIdeologyLife stanceLife stanceLifestyleLifestyleMemes/MemeplexMemesMemeplexMental modelMental modelMetanarrativeMetanarrativeMindsetMindsetNormsNormsParadigmParadigmPhilosophical theoryPhilosophical theoryPoint of viewPoint of viewPresuppositionsPresuppositionsReality tunnelReality tunnelReceived viewReceived viewSchemataSchemataSchool of thoughtSchool of thoughtSetSetSocial realitySocial realityTheory of everythingTheory of everythingUmweltUmweltValue systemValue system






 
Aspects










Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping








Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect








Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship








Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena








Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)








Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables








Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing













 
Aspects










Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping








Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect








Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship








Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena








Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)








Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables








Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing










 
Aspects










Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping








Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect








Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship








Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena








Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)








Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables








Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing








 
Aspects

 
Aspects
 Aspects






Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping








Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect








Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship








Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena








Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)








Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables








Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing










Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping








Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect








Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship








Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena








Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)








Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables








Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing







Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping








Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect








Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship








Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena








Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)








Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables








Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing





Biases



Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping



BiasesBiases


Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping




Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping


Academic
Attentional
Attitude polarization
Belief
Cognitive (list)
Collective narcissism
Confirmation
Congruence
Cryptomnesia
Cultural
Ethnocentrism
Filter bubble
Homophily
In-group favoritism
Magical thinking
Media
Observer-expectancy
Observational error
Selective exposure
Selective perception
Self-deception
Self-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)
Status quo
Stereotyping
AcademicAcademicAttentionalAttentionalAttitude polarizationAttitude polarizationBeliefBeliefCognitive (list)CognitivelistCollective narcissismCollective narcissismConfirmationConfirmationCongruenceCongruenceCryptomnesiaCryptomnesiaCulturalCulturalEthnocentrismEthnocentrismFilter bubbleFilter bubbleHomophilyHomophilyIn-group favoritismIn-group favoritismMagical thinkingMagical thinkingMediaMediaObserver-expectancyObserver-expectancyObservational errorObservational errorSelective exposureSelective exposureSelective perceptionSelective perceptionSelf-deceptionSelf-deceptionSelf-fulfilling prophecy (Clever Hans effect, placebo effect, wishful thinking)Self-fulfilling prophecyClever Hans effectplacebo effectwishful thinkingStatus quoStatus quoStereotypingStereotyping


Change and maintenance



Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect



Change and maintenance


Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect




Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect


Activism
Argument
Argumentum ad populum
Attitude change
Censorship
Charisma
Circular reporting
Cognitive dissonance
Critical thinking
Crowd manipulation
Cultural dissonance
Deprogramming
Echo chamber
Education (religious, values)
Euphemism
Excommunication
Fear mongering
Historical revisionism
Ideological repression
Indoctrination
Media manipulation
Media regulation
Mind control
Missionaries
Moral entrepreneurship
Persuasion
Polite fiction
Political engineering
Propaganda
Propaganda model
Proselytism
Psychological manipulation
Psychological warfare
Religious conversion (forced)
Religious persecution
Religious uniformity
Revolutions
Rhetoric
Self-censorship
Social change
Social control
Social engineering
Social influence
Social progress
Suppression of dissent
Systemic bias
Woozle effect
ActivismActivismArgumentArgumentArgumentum ad populumArgumentum ad populumAttitude changeAttitude changeCensorshipCensorshipCharismaCharismaCircular reportingCircular reportingCognitive dissonanceCognitive dissonanceCritical thinkingCritical thinkingCrowd manipulationCrowd manipulationCultural dissonanceCultural dissonanceDeprogrammingDeprogrammingEcho chamberEcho chamberEducation (religious, values)EducationreligiousvaluesEuphemismEuphemismExcommunicationExcommunicationFear mongeringFear mongeringHistorical revisionismHistorical revisionismIdeological repressionIdeological repressionIndoctrinationIndoctrinationMedia manipulationMedia manipulationMedia regulationMedia regulationMind controlMind controlMissionariesMissionariesMoral entrepreneurshipMoral entrepreneurshipPersuasionPersuasionPolite fictionPolite fictionPolitical engineeringPolitical engineeringPropagandaPropagandaPropaganda modelPropaganda modelProselytismProselytismPsychological manipulationPsychological manipulationPsychological warfarePsychological warfareReligious conversion (forced)Religious conversionforcedReligious persecutionReligious persecutionReligious uniformityReligious uniformityRevolutionsRevolutionsRhetoricRhetoricSelf-censorshipSelf-censorshipSocial changeSocial changeSocial controlSocial controlSocial engineeringSocial engineeringSocial influenceSocial influenceSocial progressSocial progressSuppression of dissentSuppression of dissentSystemic biasSystemic biasWoozle effectWoozle effect


Culture



Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship



CultureCulture


Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship




Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship


Anthropology (cultural, social)
Calendars
Ceremonies
Coronations
Cross-cultural psychology
Cultural psychology
Doctrine
Employment/Serfdom/Slavery
Families
Funerals/Burial
Games
Holidays
Hygiene (ritual)
Identity (philosophy) (cultural)
Institutions
Liminality
Liturgy
Marriage
Myth and ritual
Oaths
Pilgrimages
Play
Rites of passage (secular)
Rituals
Social class/Social status/Caste
Symbols
Symbolic boundaries
Worship
Anthropology (cultural, social)AnthropologyculturalsocialCalendarsCalendarsCeremoniesCeremoniesCoronationsCoronationsCross-cultural psychologyCross-cultural psychologyCultural psychologyCultural psychologyDoctrineDoctrineEmployment/Serfdom/SlaveryEmploymentSerfdomSlaveryFamiliesFamiliesFunerals/BurialFuneralsBurialGamesGamesHolidaysHolidaysHygiene (ritual)HygieneritualIdentity (philosophy) (cultural)Identity (philosophy)culturalInstitutionsInstitutionsLiminalityLiminalityLiturgyLiturgyMarriageMarriageMyth and ritualMyth and ritualOathsOathsPilgrimagesPilgrimagesPlayPlayRites of passage (secular)Rites of passagesecularRitualsRitualsSocial class/Social status/CasteSocial classSocial statusCasteSymbolsSymbolsSymbolic boundariesSymbolic boundariesWorshipWorship


Groupthink



Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena



GroupthinkGroupthink


Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena




Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena


Abilene paradox
Bandwagon effect
Collectives
Collective behavior (animal)
Collective effervescence
Collective intelligence
Conformity
Consensus theory
Crowd
Crowd psychology
Cults
Culture-bound syndromes
Deindividuation
Democracy
Emergence
Emotional contagion
Entitativity
False-consensus effect
Folie à deux
Group action
Group dynamics
Group emotion
Group polarization
Groupshift
Herd behavior
Holism
Hysterical contagion
Information cascade
Invisible hand
Lynching
Majoritarianism/Ochlocracy
Mass action
Mass hysteria
Mass psychogenic illness
Milieu control
Mobbing
Moral panic
Organizations
Peer pressure
Pluralistic ignorance
Political correctness
Pseudoconsensus
Scapegoating
Self-organization
Social action
Social behavior
Social emotions
Social exclusion
Social facilitation (animal)
Social group
Social proof
Social psychology
Sociology
Spontaneous order
Status quo
Stigmergy
Swarm behaviour
System justification
Systems thinking
Viral phenomena
Abilene paradoxAbilene paradoxBandwagon effectBandwagon effectCollectivesCollectivesCollective behavior (animal)Collective behavioranimalCollective effervescenceCollective effervescenceCollective intelligenceCollective intelligenceConformityConformityConsensus theoryConsensus theoryCrowdCrowdCrowd psychologyCrowd psychologyCultsCultsCulture-bound syndromesCulture-bound syndromesDeindividuationDeindividuationDemocracyDemocracyEmergenceEmergenceEmotional contagionEmotional contagionEntitativityEntitativityFalse-consensus effectFalse-consensus effectFolie à deuxFolie à deuxGroup actionGroup actionGroup dynamicsGroup dynamicsGroup emotionGroup emotionGroup polarizationGroup polarizationGroupshiftGroupshiftHerd behaviorHerd behaviorHolismHolismHysterical contagionHysterical contagionInformation cascadeInformation cascadeInvisible handInvisible handLynchingLynchingMajoritarianism/OchlocracyMajoritarianismOchlocracyMass actionMass actionMass hysteriaMass hysteriaMass psychogenic illnessMass psychogenic illnessMilieu controlMilieu controlMobbingMobbingMoral panicMoral panicOrganizationsOrganizationsPeer pressurePeer pressurePluralistic ignorancePluralistic ignorancePolitical correctnessPolitical correctnessPseudoconsensusPseudoconsensusScapegoatingScapegoatingSelf-organizationSelf-organizationSocial actionSocial actionSocial behaviorSocial behaviorSocial emotionsSocial emotionsSocial exclusionSocial exclusionSocial facilitation (animal)Social facilitationanimalSocial groupSocial groupSocial proofSocial proofSocial psychologySocial psychologySociologySociologySpontaneous orderSpontaneous orderStatus quoStatus quoStigmergyStigmergySwarm behaviourSwarm behaviourSystem justificationSystem justificationSystems thinkingSystems thinkingViral phenomenaViral phenomena


Knowledge



Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)



KnowledgeKnowledge


Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)




Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)


Axioms (tacit assumptions)
Epistemology (outline)
Evidence (anecdotal, scientific)
Explanations
Faith (fideism)
Gnosis
Intuition
Meaning-making
Memory
Metaknowledge
Methodology
Observation
Observational learning
Perception
Reasoning (fallacious, logic)
Revelation
Testimony
Tradition (folklore)
Truth (consensus theory, criteria)
Axioms (tacit assumptions)Axiomstacit assumptionsEpistemology (outline)EpistemologyoutlineEvidence (anecdotal, scientific)EvidenceanecdotalscientificExplanationsExplanationsFaith (fideism)FaithfideismGnosisGnosisIntuitionIntuitionMeaning-makingMeaning-makingMemoryMemoryMetaknowledgeMetaknowledgeMethodologyMethodologyObservationObservationObservational learningObservational learningPerceptionPerceptionReasoning (fallacious, logic)ReasoningfallaciouslogicRevelationRevelationTestimonyTestimonyTradition (folklore)TraditionfolkloreTruth (consensus theory, criteria)Truthconsensus theorycriteria


Metaphysics



Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables



MetaphysicsMetaphysics


Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables




Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables


Ætiology
Afterlife
Anima mundi
Being
Causality
Concepts
Consciousness (mind–body problem)
Cosmogony
Cosmology (religious)
Creation myth
Deities (existence)
Destiny
Eschatology
Everything/Nothing
Evolution
Existence
Fiction/Non-fiction
Free will
Future
History
Ideas
Idios kosmos
Illusions
Incarnation
Information
Intelligence
Magic
Matter
Miracles
Mythology (comparative)
National mythoi
Nature (philosophical)
Ontology
Origin myths (political myths)
Otherworlds (axes mundi)
Problem of evil
Physics (natural philosophy)
Reality
Souls
Spirit
Supernature
Teleology
Theology
Time
Unobservables
ÆtiologyÆtiologyAfterlifeAfterlifeAnima mundiAnima mundiBeingBeingCausalityCausalityConceptsConceptsConsciousness (mind–body problem)Consciousnessmind–body problemCosmogonyCosmogonyCosmology (religious)CosmologyreligiousCreation mythCreation mythDeities (existence)DeitiesexistenceDestinyDestinyEschatologyEschatologyEverything/NothingEverythingNothingEvolutionEvolutionExistenceExistenceFiction/Non-fictionFictionNon-fictionFree willFree willFutureFutureHistoryHistoryIdeasIdeasIdios kosmosIdios kosmosIllusionsIllusionsIncarnationIncarnationInformationInformationIntelligenceIntelligenceMagicMagicMatterMatterMiraclesMiraclesMythology (comparative)MythologycomparativeNational mythoiNational mythoiNature (philosophical)NaturephilosophicalOntologyOntologyOrigin myths (political myths)Origin mythspolitical mythsOtherworlds (axes mundi)Otherworldsaxes mundiProblem of evilProblem of evilPhysics (natural philosophy)Physicsnatural philosophyRealityRealitySoulsSoulsSpiritSpiritSupernatureSupernatureTeleologyTeleologyTheologyTheologyTimeTimeUnobservablesUnobservables


Value



Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing



ValueValue


Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing




Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing


Æsthetics
Almsgiving/Charity
Altruism
Autonomy
Beauty
Codes of conduct
Comedy
Common good
Conscience
Consent
Creativity
Disgust
Duty
Economics
Ecstasy (emotional, religious)
Elegance
Emotions (æsthetic)
Entertainment
Eroticism
Ethics
Étiquette
Family values
Food and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)
Golden Rule
Guilt/Culpability
Happiness
Harmony
Honour
Human rights
Judgement
Justice
Laws (jurisprudence, religious)
Liberty (political freedom)
Love
Magnificence
Maxims
Meaning of life
Morality (public)
Obligations
Peace
Piety
Praxeology
Principles
Punishment
Qualities
Repentance
Reverence
Rights
Sexuality (ethics)
Sin
Social stigma
Stewardship
Styles
Sublime, The
Suffering
Sympathy
Taboo
Taste
Theodicy
Trust
Unspoken rules
Virtues & Vices
Works of art
Wrongdoing
ÆstheticsÆstheticsAlmsgiving/CharityAlmsgivingCharityAltruismAltruismAutonomyAutonomyBeautyBeautyCodes of conductCodes of conductComedyComedyCommon goodCommon goodConscienceConscienceConsentConsentCreativityCreativityDisgustDisgustDutyDutyEconomicsEconomicsEcstasy (emotional, religious)EcstasyemotionalreligiousEleganceEleganceEmotions (æsthetic)EmotionsæstheticEntertainmentEntertainmentEroticismEroticismEthicsEthicsÉtiquetteÉtiquetteFamily valuesFamily valuesFood and drink prohibitions (unclean animals)Food and drink prohibitionsunclean animalsGolden RuleGolden RuleGuilt/CulpabilityGuiltCulpabilityHappinessHappinessHarmonyHarmonyHonourHonourHuman rightsHuman rightsJudgementJudgementJusticeJusticeLaws (jurisprudence, religious)LawsjurisprudencereligiousLiberty (political freedom)Libertypolitical freedomLoveLoveMagnificenceMagnificenceMaximsMaximsMeaning of lifeMeaning of lifeMorality (public)MoralitypublicObligationsObligationsPeacePeacePietyPietyPraxeologyPraxeologyPrinciplesPrinciplesPunishmentPunishmentQualitiesQualitiesRepentanceRepentanceReverenceReverenceRightsRightsSexuality (ethics)SexualityethicsSinSinSocial stigmaSocial stigmaStewardshipStewardshipStylesStylesSublime, TheSublime, TheSufferingSufferingSympathySympathyTabooTabooTasteTasteTheodicyTheodicyTrustTrustUnspoken rulesUnspoken rulesVirtues & VicesVirtuesVicesWorks of artWorks of artWrongdoingWrongdoing






 
Examples










Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz








Economic & political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism








Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism













 
Examples










Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz








Economic & political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism








Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism










 
Examples










Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz








Economic & political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism








Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism








 
Examples

 
Examples
 Examples






Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz








Economic & political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism








Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism










Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz








Economic & political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism








Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism







Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz








Economic & political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism








Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism








Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism





Attitudes



Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz



AttitudesAttitudes


Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz




Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz


Nihilism
Optimism
Pessimism
Reclusion
Weltschmerz
NihilismNihilismOptimismOptimismPessimismPessimismReclusionReclusionWeltschmerzWeltschmerz


Economic & political ideologies



Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism



Economic & political ideologiesideologies


Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism




Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism


Authoritarianism
Anarchism
Capitalism
Christian democracy
Colonialism
Communalism
Communism
Communitarianism
Conservatism
Constitutionalism
Distributism
Environmentalism
Extremism
Fanaticism
Fascism
Feminism
Fundamentalism
Globalism
Green politics
Imperialism
Individualism
Industrialism
Intellectualism
Islamism
Liberalism
Libertarianism
Masculism
Militarism
Monarchism
Nationalism
Pacifism
Progressivism
Radicalism
Reformism
Republicanism
Social democracy
Socialism
Utilitarianism
AuthoritarianismAuthoritarianismAnarchismAnarchismCapitalismCapitalismChristian democracyChristian democracyColonialismColonialismCommunalismCommunalismCommunismCommunismCommunitarianismCommunitarianismConservatismConservatismConstitutionalismConstitutionalismDistributismDistributismEnvironmentalismEnvironmentalismExtremismExtremismFanaticismFanaticismFascismFascismFeminismFeminismFundamentalismFundamentalismGlobalismGlobalismGreen politicsGreen politicsImperialismImperialismIndividualismIndividualismIndustrialismIndustrialismIntellectualismIntellectualismIslamismIslamismLiberalismLiberalismLibertarianismLibertarianismMasculismMasculismMilitarismMilitarismMonarchismMonarchismNationalismNationalismPacifismPacifismProgressivismProgressivismRadicalismRadicalismReformismReformismRepublicanismRepublicanismSocial democracySocial democracySocialismSocialismUtilitarianismUtilitarianism


Religions



African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism



ReligionsReligions


African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism




African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism


African traditional religions
Bahá'í
Buddhism
Cao Dai
Cheondoism
Chinese traditional religions
Christianity
Ethnic religions
Hòa Hảo
Hinduism
Islam
Jainism
Judaism
Korean shamanism
Neo-Paganism
Rastafarianism
Secular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/Atheist
Shinto
Sikhism
Spiritism
Taoism
Tenrikyo
Tenriism
Unitarian Universalism
Zoroastrianism
African traditional religionsAfrican traditional religionsBahá'íBahá'íBuddhismBuddhismCao DaiCao DaiCheondoismCheondoismChinese traditional religionsChinese traditional religionsChristianityChristianityEthnic religionsEthnic religionsHòa HảoHòa HảoHinduismHinduismIslamIslamJainismJainismJudaismJudaismKorean shamanismKorean shamanismNeo-PaganismNeo-PaganismRastafarianismRastafarianismSecular/Nonreligious/Agnostic/AtheistSecularNonreligiousAgnosticAtheistShintoShintoSikhismSikhismSpiritismSpiritismTaoismTaoismTenrikyoTenrikyoTenriismTenriismUnitarian UniversalismUnitarian UniversalismZoroastrianismZoroastrianism


Schools of philosophy



Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism



Schools of philosophyphilosophy


Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism




Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism


Agriculturalism
Aristotelianism
Atomism
Averroism
Cartesianism
Cārvāka
Collectivism
Confucianism/New Confucianism
Critical theory
Cynicism
Cyrenaics
Determinism
Dualism
Eleatics
Empiricism
Eretrian school
Epicureanism
Existentialism
Foundationalism
Hedonism
Hegelianism
Hermeneutics
Historicism/New Historicism
Holism
Humanism/Renaissance humanism
Illuminationism
ʿIlm al-Kalām
Idealism
Individualism
Ionian
Kantianism/Neo-Kantianism
Kokugaku
Legalism
Logicians
Materialism
Mohism
Megarian school
Modernism/Postmodernism
Monism
Natural Law
Naturalism (Chinese)
Naturalism (western)
Nihilism
Peripatetic
Phenomenology
Platonism/Neoplatonism
Pluralism
Positivism
Pragmatism
Presocratic
Pyrrhonism
Pythagoreanism/Neopythagoreanism
Rationalism
Reductionism
Scholasticism/Neo-Scholasticism
Social constructionism
Sophism
Spinozism
Stoicism
Structuralism/Post-structuralism
Thomism
Transcendentalism
Utilitarianism
Yangism
AgriculturalismAgriculturalismAristotelianismAristotelianismAtomismAtomismAverroismAverroismCartesianismCartesianismCārvākaCārvākaCollectivismCollectivismConfucianism/New ConfucianismConfucianismNew ConfucianismCritical theoryCritical theoryCynicismCynicismCyrenaicsCyrenaicsDeterminismDeterminismDualismDualismEleaticsEleaticsEmpiricismEmpiricismEretrian schoolEretrian schoolEpicureanismEpicureanismExistentialismExistentialismFoundationalismFoundationalismHedonismHedonismHegelianismHegelianismHermeneuticsHermeneuticsHistoricism/New HistoricismHistoricismNew HistoricismHolismHolismHumanism/Renaissance humanismHumanismRenaissance humanismIlluminationismIlluminationismʿIlm al-KalāmʿIlm al-KalāmIdealismIdealismIndividualismIndividualismIonianIonianKantianism/Neo-KantianismKantianismNeo-KantianismKokugakuKokugakuLegalismLegalismLogiciansLogiciansMaterialismMaterialismMohismMohismMegarian schoolMegarian schoolModernism/PostmodernismModernismPostmodernismMonismMonismNatural LawNatural LawNaturalism (Chinese)Naturalism (Chinese)Naturalism (western)Naturalism (western)NihilismNihilismPeripateticPeripateticPhenomenologyPhenomenologyPlatonism/NeoplatonismPlatonismNeoplatonismPluralismPluralismPositivismPositivismPragmatismPragmatismPresocraticPresocraticPyrrhonismPyrrhonismPythagoreanism/NeopythagoreanismPythagoreanismNeopythagoreanismRationalismRationalismReductionismReductionismScholasticism/Neo-ScholasticismScholasticismNeo-ScholasticismSocial constructionismSocial constructionismSophismSophismSpinozismSpinozismStoicismStoicismStructuralism/Post-structuralismStructuralismPost-structuralismThomismThomismTranscendentalismTranscendentalismUtilitarianismUtilitarianismYangismYangism




Authority control



GND: 7507111-3











Authority control



GND: 7507111-3









Authority control



GND: 7507111-3







Authority control



GND: 7507111-3





Authority control



GND: 7507111-3



Authority controlAuthority control


GND: 7507111-3




GND: 7507111-3


GND: 7507111-3
GND: 7507111-3GND7507111-37507111-3
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theory_of_everything&oldid=716784654"					https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theory_of_everything&oldid=716784654Categories: Unsolved problems in physicsPhysics beyond the Standard ModelTheoretical physicsTheories of gravitationHidden categories: All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2015Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010Articles with unsourced statements from November 2010Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersCategories: Unsolved problems in physicsPhysics beyond the Standard ModelTheoretical physicsTheories of gravitationCategoriesUnsolved problems in physicsPhysics beyond the Standard ModelTheoretical physicsTheories of gravitationUnsolved problems in physicsUnsolved problems in physicsPhysics beyond the Standard ModelPhysics beyond the Standard ModelTheoretical physicsTheoretical physicsTheories of gravitationTheories of gravitationHidden categories: All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2015Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010Articles with unsourced statements from November 2010Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2015Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010Articles with unsourced statements from November 2010Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesAll articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2015Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2015Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2015Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2015All articles with unsourced statementsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010Articles with unsourced statements from November 2010Articles with unsourced statements from November 2010Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011Wikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers
Navigation menu


Personal tools

Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in 



Namespaces

Article
Talk




Variants









Views

Read
Edit
View history



More







Search



 







Navigation


Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store 



Interaction


HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page 



Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page 



Print/export


Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version 



In other projects


Wikimedia Commons 



Languages


AfrikaansالعربيةБеларускаяCatalàČeštinaDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어हिन्दीItalianoעבריתMagyarMaltiNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSuomiSvenskaไทยTürkçeУкраїнська中文 
Edit links 


Navigation menu

Personal tools

Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in 



Namespaces

Article
Talk




Variants









Views

Read
Edit
View history



More







Search



 




Personal tools

Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in 
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Not logged inTalkTalkContributionsContributionsCreate accountCreate accountLog inLog in

Namespaces

Article
Talk




Variants







Namespaces

Article
Talk

Namespaces
Article
Talk
ArticleArticleArticleTalkTalkTalk

Variants






Variants
Variants





Views

Read
Edit
View history



More







Search



 



Views

Read
Edit
View history

Views
Read
Edit
View history
ReadReadReadEditEditEditView historyView historyView history
More




MoreMore





Search



 


Search
Search

 

 


Navigation


Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store 



Interaction


HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page 



Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page 



Print/export


Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version 



In other projects


Wikimedia Commons 



Languages


AfrikaansالعربيةБеларускаяCatalàČeštinaDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어हिन्दीItalianoעבריתMagyarMaltiNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSuomiSvenskaไทยTürkçeУкраїнська中文 
Edit links 


Navigation


Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store 

Navigation

Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store 

Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Main pageMain pageContentsContentsFeatured contentFeatured contentCurrent eventsCurrent eventsRandom articleRandom articleDonate to WikipediaDonate to WikipediaWikipedia storeWikipedia store
Interaction


HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page 

Interaction

HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page 

HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page HelpHelpAbout WikipediaAbout WikipediaCommunity portalCommunity portalRecent changesRecent changesContact pageContact page
Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page 

Tools

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page 

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page What links hereWhat links hereRelated changesRelated changesUpload fileUpload fileSpecial pagesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPermanent linkPage informationPage informationWikidata itemWikidata itemCite this pageCite this page
Print/export


Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version 

Print/export

Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version 

Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Create a bookCreate a bookDownload as PDFDownload as PDFPrintable versionPrintable version
In other projects


Wikimedia Commons 

In other projects

Wikimedia Commons 

Wikimedia Commons Wikimedia CommonsWikimedia Commons
Languages


AfrikaansالعربيةБеларускаяCatalàČeštinaDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어हिन्दीItalianoעבריתMagyarMaltiNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSuomiSvenskaไทยTürkçeУкраїнська中文 
Edit links 
Languages

AfrikaansالعربيةБеларускаяCatalàČeštinaDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어हिन्दीItalianoעבריתMagyarMaltiNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSuomiSvenskaไทยTürkçeУкраїнська中文 
Edit links 
AfrikaansالعربيةБеларускаяCatalàČeštinaDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어हिन्दीItalianoעבריתMagyarMaltiNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSuomiSvenskaไทยTürkçeУкраїнська中文 AfrikaansAfrikaansالعربيةالعربيةБеларускаяБеларускаяCatalàCatalàČeštinaČeštinaDeutschDeutschEspañolEspañolفارسیفارسیFrançaisFrançaisGalegoGalego한국어한국어हिन्दीहिन्दीItalianoItalianoעבריתעבריתMagyarMagyarMaltiMaltiNederlandsNederlands日本語日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk bokmålNorsk nynorskNorsk nynorskਪੰਜਾਬੀਪੰਜਾਬੀPolskiPolskiPortuguêsPortuguêsRomânăRomânăРусскийРусскийSimple EnglishSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSlovenčinaSlovenščinaSlovenščinaSuomiSuomiSvenskaSvenskaไทยไทยTürkçeTürkçeУкраїнськаУкраїнська中文中文Edit linksEdit linksEdit links

 This page was last modified on 23 April 2016, at 21:14.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Developers
Cookie statement
Mobile view



 

 



 This page was last modified on 23 April 2016, at 21:14.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
 This page was last modified on 23 April 2016, at 21:14.Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike LicenseTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyWikimedia Foundation, Inc.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Developers
Cookie statement
Mobile view
Privacy policyPrivacy policyAbout WikipediaAbout WikipediaDisclaimersDisclaimersContact WikipediaContact WikipediaDevelopersDevelopersCookie statementCookie statementMobile viewMobile view

 

 

 
 